<div class="biblequote">
<p class="p2 noic"><i>And thine eye shall not pity.</i><br/>
<span class="flright works"><i>Deuteronomy, XIX. 21.</i></span></p>
</div>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_I">CHAPTER I.</a><br/>
<small>MR. INCOUL.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">When Harmon Incoul’s wife died, the
world in which he lived said that he
would not marry again. The bereavement
which he had suffered was known to be bitter,
and it was reported that he might betake himself
to some foreign land. There was, for that
matter, nothing to keep him at home. He was
childless, his tastes were too simple to make
it necessary for him to reside as he had,
hitherto, in New York, and, moreover, he
was a man whose wealth was proverbial.
Had he so chosen, he had little else to do
than to purchase a ticket and journey wheresoever
he listed, and the knowledge of this
ability may have been to him not without its
consolations. Yet, if he attempted to map
some plan, and think which spot he would
prefer, he probably reflected that whatever
place he might choose, he would, in the end,
be not unlike the invalid who turns over in
his bed, and then turns back again on finding<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_12">[12]</a></span>
the second position no better than the
first. However fair another sky might be, it
would not make his sorrow less acute.</p>
<p>He was then one of those men whose age
is difficult to determine. He had married
when quite young, and at the time of his
widowerhood he must have been nearly
forty, but years had treated him kindly.
His hair, it is true, was inclined to scantiness,
and his skin was etiolated, but he was
not stout, his teeth were sound, he held himself
well, and his eyes had not lost their
lustre. At a distance, one might have
thought him in the thirties, but in conversation
his speech was so measured, and about
his lips there was a compression such that
the ordinary observer fancied him older than
he really was.</p>
<p>His position was unexceptionable. He
had inherited a mile of real estate in a populous
part of New York, together with an accumulation
of securities sufficient for the pay
and maintenance of a small army. The
foundations of this wealth had been laid by
an ancestor, materially increased by his
grandfather, and consolidated by his father,
who had married a Miss Van Tromp, the
ultimate descendant of the Dutch admiral.</p>
<p>His boyhood had not been happy. His<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_13">[13]</a></span>
father had been a lean, taciturn, unlovable
man, rigid in principles, stern in manner,
and unyielding in his adherence to the narrowest
tenets of Presbyterianism. His
mother had died while he was yet in the
nursery, and, in the absence of any softening
influence, the angles of his earliest nature
were left in the rough.</p>
<p>At school, he manifested a vindictiveness
of disposition which made him feared and
disliked. One day, a comrade raised the lid
of a desk adjoining his own. The raising of
the lid was abrupt and possibly intentional.
It jarred him in a task. The boy was dragged
from him senseless and bleeding. In college,
he became aggrieved at a tutor. For three
weeks he had him shadowed, then, having
discovered an irregularity in his private life,
he caused to be laid before the faculty sufficient
evidence to insure his removal. Meanwhile,
acting presumably on the principle that
an avowed hatred is powerless, he treated the
tutor as though the grievance had been forgotten.
A little later, owing to some act of
riotous insubordination, he was himself expelled,
and the expulsion seemed to have
done him good. He went to Paris and
listened decorously to lectures at the Sorbonne,
after which he strayed to Heidelberg,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_14">[14]</a></span>
where he sat out five semesters without fighting
a duel or making himself ill with beer. In
his fourth summer abroad, he met the young
lady who became his wife. His father died,
he returned to New York, and thereafter led
a model existence.</p>
<p>He was proud of his wife and indulgent to
her every wish. During the years that they
lived together, there was no sign or rumor of
the slightest disagreement. She was of a
sweet and benevolent disposition, and though
beyond a furtive coin he gave little to the
poor, he encouraged her to donate liberally
to the charities which she was solicited to assist.
She was a woman with a quick sense of
the beautiful, and in spite of the simplicity of
his own tastes, he had a house on Madison
avenue rebuilt and furnished in such a fashion
that it was pointed out to strangers as one of
the chief palaces of the city. She liked,
moreover, to have her friends about her, and
while he cared as much for society as he did
for the negro minstrels, he insisted that she
should give entertainments and fill the house
with guests. In the winter succeeding the
fifteenth anniversary of their marriage, Mrs.
Incoul caught a chill, took to her bed and
died, forty-eight hours later, of pneumonia.</p>
<p>It was then that the world said that he<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_15">[15]</a></span>
would not marry again. For two years he
gave the world no reason to say otherwise,
and for two years time hung heavy on his
hands. He was an excellent chess-player,
and interested in archæological pursuits, but
beyond that his resources were limited. He
was too energetic to be a dilettante, he had
no taste for horseflesh, the game of speculation
did not interest him, and his artistic
tendencies were few. Now and then, a Mr.
Blydenburg, a florid, talkative man, a widower
like himself, came to him of an evening, and
the chess-board was prepared. But practically
his life was one of solitude, and the
solitude grew irksome to him.</p>
<p>Meanwhile his wound healed as wounds
do. The cicatrix perhaps was ineffaceable,
but at least the smart had subsided, and in
its subsidence he found that the great house
in which he lived had taken on the silence of
a tomb. Soon he began to go out a little.
He was seen at meetings of the Archæological
Society and of an afternoon he was visible in
the Park. He even attended a reception
given to an English thinker, and one night
applauded Salvini.</p>
<p>At first he went about with something of
that uncertainty which visits one who passes
from a dark room to a bright one, but in a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_16">[16]</a></span>
little while his early constraint fell from him,
and he found that he could mingle again with
his fellows.</p>
<p>At some entertainment he met a delicious
young girl, Miss Maida Barhyte by name,
whom for the moment he admired impersonally,
as he might have admired a flower, and
until he saw her again, forgot her very existence.
It so happened, however, that he saw
her frequently. One evening he sat next to
her at a dinner and learning from her that
she was to be present at a certain reception,
made a point of being present himself.</p>
<p>This reception was given by Mrs. Bachelor,
a lady, well known in society, who kept an
unrevised list, and at stated intervals issued
invitations to the dead, divorced and defaulted.
When she threw her house open,
she liked to have it filled, and to her discredit
it must be said that in that she invariably
succeeded. On the evening that Mr.
Incoul crossed her vestibule, he was met
by a hum of voices, broken by the rhythm
of a waltz. The air was heavy, and in the
hall was a smell of flowers and of food. The
rooms were crowded. His friend Blydenburg
was present and with him his daughter.
The Wainwarings, whom he had always
known, were also there, and there were other<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_17">[17]</a></span>
people by whom he had not been forgotten,
and with whom he exchanged a word, but for
Miss Barhyte he looked at first in vain.</p>
<p>He would have gone, a crowd was as irksome
to him as solitude, but in passing an
outer room elaborately supplied with paintings
and bric-à-brac, he caught a glimpse of
the girl talking with a young man whom he
vaguely remembered to have seen in earlier
days at his own home.</p>
<p>He walked in: Miss Barhyte greeted him
as an old friend: there were other people
near her, and the young man with whom she
had been talking turned and joined them,
and presently passed with them into another
room.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul found a seat beside the girl,
and, after a little unimportant conversation
asked her a question at which she started.
But Mr. Incoul was not in haste for an answer,
he told her that with her permission, he
would do himself the honor of calling on her
later, and, as the room was then invaded by
some of her friends, he left her to them, and
went his way.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_18">[18]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_II">CHAPTER II.</a><br/>
<small>MISS BARHYTE AGREES TO CHANGE HER
NAME.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">A day or two after Mrs. Bachelor’s reception,
Mr. Incoul walked down Madison
avenue, turned into one of the adjacent
streets and rang the bell of a private boarding-house.</p>
<p>As he stood on the steps waiting for the
door to be opened, a butcher-boy passed,
whistling shrilly. Across the way a nurse-maid
was idling with a perambulator, a
slim-figured girl hurried by, a well-dressed
woman descended from a carriage and a
young man with a flower in his button-hole
issued from a neighboring house. The
nurse-maid stayed the perambulator and
scrutinized the folds of the woman’s gown;
the young man eyed the hurrying girl; from
the end of the street came the whistle of the
retreating butcher, and as it fused into the
rumble of Fifth avenue, Mr. Incoul heard
the door opening behind him.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_19">[19]</a></span></p>
<p>“Is Miss Barhyte at home?” he asked.</p>
<p>The servant, a negro, answered that she
was.</p>
<p>“Then be good enough,” said Mr. Incoul,
“to take her this card.”</p>
<p>The drawing-room, long and narrow, as is
usual in many New York houses, was furnished
in that fashion which is suggestive of
a sheriff’s sale, and best calculated to jar the
nerves. Mr. Incoul did not wince. He gave
the appointments one cursory, reluctant
glance, and then went to the window. Across
the way the nurse-maid still idled, the young
man with a flower was drawing on a red
glove, stitched with black, and as he looked
out at them he heard a rustle, and turning,
saw Miss Barhyte.</p>
<p>“I have come for an answer,” he said
simply.</p>
<p>“I am glad to see you,” she answered,
“very glad; I have thought much about what
you said.”</p>
<p>“Favorably, I hope.”</p>
<p>“That must depend on you.” She went to
a bell and touched it. “Archibald,” she said,
when the negro appeared, “I am out. If
any visitors come take them into the other
room. Should any one want to come in here
before I ring, say the parlor is being swept.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_20">[20]</a></span></p>
<p>The man bowed and withdrew. He would
have stood on his head for her. There were
few servants that she did not affect in much
the same manner. She seemed to win willingness
naturally.</p>
<p>She seated herself on a sofa, and opposite
to her Mr. Incoul found a chair. Her dress
he noticed was of some dark material, tailor-made,
and unrelieved save by a high white
collar and the momentary glisten of a button.
The cut and sobriety of her costume made
her look like a handsome boy, a young Olympian
as it were, one who had strayed from
the games and been arrayed in modern guise.
Indeed, her features suggested that combination
of beauty and sensitiveness which was
peculiar to the Greek lad, but her eyes were
not dark—they were the blue victorious eyes
of the Norseman—and her hair was red, the
red of old gold, that red which partakes both
of orange and of flame.</p>
<p>“I hope—” Mr. Incoul began, but she
interrupted him.</p>
<p>“Wait,” she said, “I have much to tell you
of which the telling is difficult. Will you
bear with me a moment?”</p>
<p>“Surely,” he answered.</p>
<p>“It is this: It is needless for me to say I
esteem you; it is unnecessary for me to say<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_21">[21]</a></span>
that I respect you, but it is because I do both
that I feel I may speak frankly. My mother
wishes me to marry you, but I do not. Let
me tell you, first, that when my father died
he left very little, but the little that he left
seems to have disappeared, I do not know
how or where. I know merely that we
have next to nothing, and that we are in
debt beside. Something, of course, has
had to be done. I have found a position.
Where do you suppose?” she asked, with
a sudden smile and a complete change of
key.</p>
<p>But Mr. Incoul had no surmises.</p>
<p>“In San Francisco! The MacDermotts,
you know, the Bonanza people, want me to
return with them and teach their daughter
how to hold herself, and what not to say. It
has been arranged that I am to go next week.
Since the other night, however, my mother
has told me to give up the MacDermotts and
accept your offer. But that, of course, I
cannot do.”</p>
<p>“And why not?”</p>
<p>To this Miss Barhyte made no answer.</p>
<p>“You do not care for me, I know; there is
slight reason why you should. Yet, might
you not, perhaps, in time?”</p>
<p>The girl raised her eyebrows ever so<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_22">[22]</a></span>
slightly. “So you see,” she continued, “I
shall have to go to San Francisco.”</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul remained silent a moment.
“If,” he said, at last, “if you will do me the
honor to become my wife, in time you will
care. It is painful for me to think of you
accepting a position which at best is but a
shade better than that of a servant, particularly
so when I am able—nay, anxious,” he
added, pensively—“to surround you with
everything which can make life pleasant. I
am not old,” he went on to say, “at least not
so old that a marriage between us should
seem incongruous. I find that I am sincerely
attached to you—unselfishly, perhaps,
would be the better word—and, if the
privilege could be mine, the endeavor to
make you happy would be to me more grateful
than a second youth. Can you not accept
me?”</p>
<p>He had been speaking less to her than to
the hat which he held in his hand. The
phrases had come from him haltingly, one by
one, as though he had sought to weigh each
mentally before dowering it with the wings of
utterance, but, as he addressed this question
he looked up at her. “Can you not?” he repeated.</p>
<p>Miss Barhyte raised a handkerchief to her<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_23">[23]</a></span>
lips and bit the shred of cambric with the
<i>disinvoltura</i> of an heiress.</p>
<p>“Why is it,” she queried, “why is it that
marriage ever was invented? Why cannot a
girl accept help from a man without becoming
his wife?”</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul was about to reply that many
do, but he felt that such a reply would be
misplaced, and he called a platitude to his
rescue. “There are wives and wives,” he said.</p>
<p>“That is it,” the girl returned, the color
mounting to her cheeks; “if I could but be to
you one of the latter.”</p>
<p>He stared at her wonderingly, almost hopefully.
“What do you mean?” he asked.</p>
<p>“Did you ever read ‘Eugénie Grandet’?”</p>
<p>“No,” he answered, “I never have.”</p>
<p>“Well, I read it years ago. It is, I believe,
the only one of Balzac’s novels that young
girls are supposed to read. It is tiresome indeed;
I had almost forgotten it, but yesterday
I remembered enough of the story to
help me to come to some decision. In thinking
the matter over and over again as I have
done ever since I last saw you it has seemed
that I could not become your wife unless you
were willing to make the same agreement
with me that Eugénie Grandet’s husband
made with her.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_24">[24]</a></span></p>
<p>“What was the nature of that agreement?”</p>
<p>“It was that, though married, they were to
live as though they were not married—as
might brother and sister.”</p>
<p>“Always?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“No,” Mr. Incoul answered, “to such
an agreement I could not consent. Did
I do so, I would be untrue to myself,
unmanly to you. But if you will give me
the right to aid you and yours, I will—according
to my lights—leave nothing undone
to make you contented; and if I succeed
in so doing, if you are happy, then the
agreement which you have suggested would
fall of itself. Would it not?” he continued.
“Would it not be baseless? See—” he
added, and he made a vague gesture, but
before he could finish the phrase, the girl’s
hands were before her face and he knew that
she was weeping.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul was not tender-hearted. He
felt toward Miss Barhyte as were she some
poem in flesh that it would be pleasant to make
his own. In her carriage as in her looks, he
had seen that stamp of breeding which is
coercive even to the dissolute. In her eyes
he had discerned that promise of delight
which it is said the lost goddesses could convey;<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_25">[25]</a></span>
and at whose conveyance, the legend
says, the minds of men were enraptured. It
was in this wise that he felt to her. Such
exhilaration as she may have brought him
was of the spirit, and being cold by nature and
undemonstrative, her tears annoyed him. He
would have had her impassive, as befitted her
beauty. Beside, he was annoyed at his own
attitude. Why should there be sorrow where
he had sought to bring smiles? But he had
barely time to formulate his annoyance into
a thing even as volatile as thought—the
girl had risen and was leaving the room.</p>
<p>As she moved to the door Mr. Incoul hastened
to open it for her, but she reached it
before him and passed out unassisted.</p>
<p>When she had gone he noticed that the
sun was setting and that the room was even
more hideous than before. He went again
to the window wondering how to act.
The entire scene was a surprise to him. He
had come knowing nothing of the girl’s circumstances,
and suddenly he learned that
she was in indigence, unable perhaps to pay
her board bills and worried by small tradesmen.
He had come prepared to be refused
and she had almost accepted him. But what
an acceptance! In the nature of it his
thoughts roamed curiously: he was to be a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_26">[26]</a></span>
little more than kin, a little less than kind.
She would accept him as a husband for out-of-door
purposes, for the world’s sake she
would bear his name—at arm’s length. According
to the terms of her proposition were
she ever really his wife it would be tantamount
to a seduction. He was to be with her, and
yet, until she so willed it, unable to call her
his own. And did he refuse these terms, she
was off, no one knew whither. But he had
not refused, he told himself, he had indeed
not refused, he had merely suggested an
amendment which turned an impossibility
into an allurement. What pleasanter thing
could there be than the winning of one’s own
wife? The idea was so novel it delighted
him. For the moment he preferred it to
any other; beside it his former experience
seemed humdrum indeed. But why had
she wept? Her reasons, however, he had
then no chance to elucidate. Miss Barhyte
returned as abruptly as she had departed.</p>
<p>“Forgive me,” she said, advancing to
where he stood, “it was stupid of me to act
as I did. I am sorry—are we still friends?”
Her eyes were clear as had she never wept,
but there were circles about them, and her
face was colorless.</p>
<p>“Friends,” he answered, “yes, and more—”<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_27">[27]</a></span>
He hesitated a moment, and then hastily
added, “It is agreed, then, is it not, you will
be my wife?”</p>
<p>“I will be your wife?”</p>
<p>“As Balzac’s heroine was to her husband?”</p>
<p>“You have said it.”</p>
<p>“But not always. If there come a time
when you care for me, then I may ask you to
give me your heart as to-day I have asked
for your hand?”</p>
<p>“When that day comes, believe me,” she
said, and her delicious face took on a richer
hue, “when that day comes there will be
neither asking nor giving, we shall have
come into our own.”</p>
<p>With this assurance Mr. Incoul was fain
to be content, and, after another word or
two, he took his leave.</p>
<p>For some time after his departure, Miss
Barhyte stood thinking. It had grown quite
dark. Before the window a street lamp
burned with a small, steady flame, but beyond,
the azure of the electric light pervaded
the adjacent square with a suggestion of absinthe
and vice. One by one the opposite
houses took on some form of interior illumination.
A newsboy passed, hawking an
extra with a noisy, aggressive ferocity as
though he were angry with the neighborhood,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_28">[28]</a></span>
and dared it come out and wrestle
with him for his wares. There was a thin
broken stream of shop-girls passing eastward;
at intervals, men in evening dress
sauntered leisurely to their dinners, to restaurants,
or to clubland, and over the rough
pavement there was a ceaseless rattle of
traps and of wagons; the air was alive with
the indefinable murmurs of a great city.</p>
<p>Miss Barhyte noticed none of these things.
She had taken her former seat on the sofa
and sat, her elbow on her crossed knee, her
chin resting in her hand, while the fingers
touched and barely separated her lips. The
light from without was just strong enough to
reach her feet and make visible the gold
clock on her silk stocking, but her face was
in the shadow as were her thoughts.</p>
<p>Presently she rose and rang the bell.
“Archibald,” she said, when the man came,
and who at once busied himself with lighting
the gas, “I want to send a note; can’t you
take it? It’s only across the square.”</p>
<p>“I’ll have to be mighty spry about it,
miss. The old lady do carry on most unreasonable
if I go for anybody but herself.
She has laws that strict they’d knock the
Swedes and Prussians silly. Why, you
wouldn’t believe if I told you how—”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_29">[29]</a></span></p>
<p>And Archibald ran on with an unbelievable
tale of recent adventure with the landlady.
But the girl feigned no interest. She
had taken a card from her case. On it she
wrote, <i>Viens ce soir</i>, and after running the
pencil through her name, she wrote on the
other side, Lenox Leigh, esq., Athenæum
Club.</p>
<p>“There,” she said, interrupting the negro
in the very climax of his story, “it’s for Mr.
Leigh; you are sure to find him, so wait for
an answer.”</p>
<p>A fraction of an hour later, when Miss
Barhyte took her seat at the dinner table,
she found beside her plate a note that contained
a single line: “Will be with you at
nine. I kiss your lips. L. L.”</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_30">[30]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_III">CHAPTER III.</a><br/>
<small>AFTER DARKNESS.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">When Miss Barhyte was one year
younger she had gone with her mother
to pass the summer at Mt. Desert; and there,
the morning of her arrival, on the monster
angle of Rodick’s porch, Lenox Leigh had
caused himself to be presented.</p>
<p>A week later Miss Barhyte and her new
acquaintance were as much gossiped about
as was possible in that once unconventional
resort.</p>
<p>Lenox Leigh was by birth a Baltimorean,
and by profession a gentleman of leisure, yet
as the exercise of that profession is considered
less profitable in Baltimore than in New
York, he had, for some time past, been
domiciled in the latter city. From the onset
he was well received; one of the Amsterdams
had married a Leigh, his only sister had
charmed the heart of Nicholas Manhattan,
and being in this wise connected with two of
the reigning families, he found the doors<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_31">[31]</a></span>
open as a matter of course. But even in the
absence of potent relatives, there was no
reason why he should not have been cordially
welcomed. He was, it is true, better
read than nineteen men out of twenty; when
he went to the opera he preferred listening to
the music to wandering from box to box; he
declined to figure in cotillons and at no
dinner, at no supper had he been known to
drink anything stronger than claret and
water.</p>
<p>But as an offset to these defects he was one
of the most admirably disorganized young men
that ever trod Fifth avenue. He was without
beliefs and without prejudices; added to
this he was indulgent to the failings of others,
or perhaps it would be better to say that he
was indifferent. It may be that the worst
thing about him was that he was not bad
enough; his wickedness, such as there was
of it, was purely negative. A poet of the
decadence of that period in fact when Rome
had begun to weary of debauchery without
yet acquiring a taste for virtue, a pre-mediæval
Epicurean, let us say, could not have
pushed a creedless refinement to a greater
height than he. There were men who thought
him a prig, and who said so when his back
was turned.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_32">[32]</a></span></p>
<p>It was in the company of this patrician of a
later day that Miss Barhyte participated in
the enjoyments of Mt. Desert. Leigh was
then in his twenty-fifth year, and Miss
Barhyte was just grazing the twenties. He
was attractive in appearance, possessed of
those features which now and then permit a
man to do without beard or moustache, and
his hair, which was black, clung so closely to
his head that at a distance it might have been
taken for the casque of a Saracen. To Miss
Barhyte, as already noted, a full share of
beauty had been allotted. Together they
formed one of the most charming couples
that it has ever been the historian’s privilege
to admire. And being a charming couple,
and constantly together, they excited much
interest in the minds of certain ladies who
hailed from recondite Massachusettsian regions.</p>
<p>To this interest they were indifferent. At
first, during the early evenings when the stars
were put out by the Northern Lights, they
rowed to the outermost shore of a neighboring
island and lingered there for hours in an
enchanted silence. Later, in the midsummer
nights, when the harvest-moon was round
and mellow, they wandered through the open
fields back into the Dantesque forests and<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_33">[33]</a></span>
strayed in the clinging shadows and inviting
solitudes of the pines.</p>
<p>From one such excursion they returned
to the hotel at an hour which startled the
night porter, who, in that capricious resort,
should have lost his ability to be startled at
anything.</p>
<p>That afternoon Mrs. Bunker Hill—one of
the ladies to whom allusion has been made—approached
Miss Barhyte on the porch.
“And are you to be here much longer?” she
asked, after a moment or two of desultory
conversation.</p>
<p>“The holidays are almost over,” the girl
answered, with her radiant smile.</p>
<p>“<i>Holidays</i> do you call them? <i>Holidays</i>
did I understand you to say? <i>I</i> should have
called them <i>fast</i> days.” And, with that elaborate
witticism, Mrs. Bunker Hill shook out
her skirts and sailed away.</p>
<p>Meanwhile an enveloping intimacy had
sprung up between the two young people.
Their conversation need not be chronicled.
There was in it nothing unusual and nothing
particularly brilliant; it was but a strain
from that archaic duo in which we have all
taken part and which at each repetition seems
an original theme.</p>
<p>For the first time Miss Barhyte learned the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_34">[34]</a></span>
intoxication of love. She gave her heart
ungrudgingly, without calculation, without
forethought, wholly, as a heart should be
given and freely as had the gift been consecrated
in the nave of a cathedral. If she
were generous why should she be blamed?
In the giving she found that mite of happiness,
that one unclouded day that is fair as
June roses and dawns but once.</p>
<p>In September Miss Barhyte went with her
mother on a visit in the Berkshire Hills.
Leigh journeyed South. A matter of business
claimed his attention in Baltimore, and
when, early in November, he reached New
York the girl had already returned.</p>
<p>Since the death of Barhyte <i>père</i> she had
lived with her mother in a small house in
Irving Place, which they rented, furnished,
by the year. But on this particular autumn
affairs had gone so badly, some stock had
depreciated, some railroad had been mismanaged,
or some trustee had speculated—something,
in fact, had happened of which no
one save those personally interested ever
know or ever care, and, as a result, the house
in Irving Place was given up, and the mother
and daughter moved into a boarding-house.</p>
<p>Of all this Lenox Leigh was made duly
aware. Had he been able, and could such a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_35">[35]</a></span>
thing have been proper and conventional, he
would have been glad indeed to offer assistance;
he was not selfish, but then he was not
rich, a condition which always makes unselfishness
easy. Matrimony was out of the
question; his income was large enough to
permit him to live without running into debt,
but beyond that its flexibility did not extend,
and in money matters, and in money matters
alone, Lenox Leigh was the most scrupulous
of men. Beside, as the phrase goes, he was
not a marrying man—marriage, he was accustomed
to assert, means one woman more
and one man less, and beyond that definition
he steadfastly declined to look, except to announce
that, like some other institutions,
matrimony was going out of fashion.</p>
<p>That winter Miss Barhyte was more circumspect.
It was not that her affection had
faltered, but in the monochromes of a great
city the primal glamour that was born of the
fields and of the sea lost its lustre. Then,
too, Lenox in the correctness of evening dress
was not the same adorer who had lounged in
flannels at her side, and the change from the
open country to the boarding-house parlor
affected their spirits unconsciously.</p>
<p>And so the months wore away. There
were dinners and routs which the young<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_36">[36]</a></span>
people attended in common, there were long
walks on avenues unfrequented by fashion,
and there were evenings prearranged which
they passed together and during which the
girl’s mother sat up stairs and thought her
own thoughts.</p>
<p>Mrs. Barhyte had been a pretty woman and
inconsequential, as pretty woman are apt to
be. Her girlhood had been of the happiest,
without a noteworthy grief. She married one
whose perfection had seemed to her impeccable,
and then suddenly without a monition
the tide of disaster set in. After the birth of
a second child, Maida, her husband began to
drink, and drank, after each debauch with a
face paler than before, until disgrace came
and with it a plunge into the North River.
Her elder child, a son, on whom she placed
her remaining hopes, had barely skirted manhood
before he was taken from her to die of
small-pox in a hospital. Then came a depreciation
in the securities which she held and in
its train the small miseries of the shabby
genteel. Finally, the few annual thousands
that were left to her seemed to evaporate,
and as she sat in her room alone her thoughts
were bitter. The pretty inconsequential girl
had developed into a woman, hardened yet
unresigned. At forty-five her hair was white,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_37">[37]</a></span>
her face was colorless as her widow’s cap, her
heart was dead.</p>
<p>On the night when her daughter, under
the chaperonage of Mrs. Hildred, one of her
few surviving relatives—returned from the
reception, she was still sitting up. At Mrs.
Hildred’s suggestion a position, to which
allusion has been made, had been offered
to her daughter, and that position—the
bringing up or rather the bringing out of
a child of the West—she determined
that her daughter should accept. Afterwards—well,
perhaps for Maida there were
other things in store, as for herself she
expected little. She would betake herself
to some Connecticut village and there wait
for death.</p>
<p>When her daughter entered the room she
was sitting in the erect impassibility of a
statue. Her eyes indeed were restless, but
her face was dumb, and in the presence of
that silent desolation, the girl’s tender heart
was touched.</p>
<p>“Mother!” she exclaimed, “why did you
wait up for me?” And she found a seat on
the sofa near her mother and took her hand
caressingly in her own. “Why are you up
so late,” she continued, “are you not
tired? Oh, mother,” the girl cried, impetuously,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_38">[38]</a></span>
“if you only knew what happened to-night—what
do you suppose?”</p>
<p>But Mrs. Barhyte shook her head, she had
no thoughts left for suppositions. And
quickly, for the mere sake of telling something
that would arouse her mother if ever so little
from her apathy, Maida related Mr. Incoul’s
offer. Her success was greater, if other,
than she anticipated. It was as though she
had poured into a parching throat the very
waters of life. It was the post tenebras, lux.
And what a light! The incandescence of
unexpected hope. A cataract of gold pieces
could not have been more dazzling; it was
blinding after the shadows in which she had
groped. The color came to her cheeks, her
hand grew moist. “Yes, yes,” she cried,
urging the girl’s narrative with a motion of
the head like to that of a jockey speeding to
the post; “yes, yes,” she repeated, and her
restless eyes flamed with the heat of fever.</p>
<p>“Wasn’t it odd?” Maida concluded abruptly.</p>
<p>“But you accepted him?” the mother
asked hoarsely, almost fiercely.</p>
<p>“Accepted him? No, of course not—he—why,
mother, what is the matter?”</p>
<p>Engrossed in the telling of her story, the
girl had not noticed her mother’s agitation,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_39">[39]</a></span>
but at her last words, at the answer to the
question, her wrist had been caught as in a
vise, and eyes that she no longer recognized—eyes
dilated with anger, desperation and
revulsion of feeling—were staring into her
own. Instinctively she drew back—“Oh,
mother, what is it?” And the mother bending
forward, even as the daughter retreated,
hissed, “You shall accept him—I say you
shall!”</p>
<p>“Mother, mother,” the girl moaned, helplessly.</p>
<p>“You shall accept him, do you hear me?”</p>
<p>“But, mother, how can I?” The tears
were rolling down her cheeks, she was frightened—the
acute, agonizing fright of a child
pursued. She tried to free herself, but the
hands on her wrist only tightened, and her
mother’s face, livid now, was close to her
own.</p>
<p>“You shall accept him,” she repeated with
the insistence of a monomaniac. And the
girl, with bended head, through the paroxysms
of her sobs, could only murmur in piteous,
beseeching tones, “Mother! mother!”</p>
<p>But to the plaint the woman was as deaf as
her heart was dumb. She indeed loosened
her hold and the girl fell back on the lounge
from which they had both arisen, but it was<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_40">[40]</a></span>
only to summon from the reservoirs of her
being some new strength wherewith to vanquish.
For a moment she stood motionless,
watching the girl quiver in her emotion, and
as the sobbing subsided, she stretched forth
her hand again, and caught her by the shoulder.</p>
<p>“Look up at me,” she said, and the girl,
obedient, rose from her seat and gazed imploringly
in her mother’s face. No Neapolitan
fish-wife was ever more eager to barter
her daughter than was this lady of acknowledged
piety and refinement, and the face into
which her daughter looked and shrank from
bore no trace of pity or compassion. “Tell
me if you dare,” she continued, “tell me
why it is that you refuse? What more do
you want? Are you a princess of the blood?
Perhaps you will say you don’t love him!
And what if you don’t? I loved your father
and look at me now! Beside, you have had
enough of that—there, don’t stare at me in
that way. I know, and so do you. Now
take your choice—accept this offer or get
to your lover—and this very night. As for
me, I disown you, I—”</p>
<p>But the flood of words was interrupted—the
girl had fainted. The simulachre of
death had extended its kindly arms, and into<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_41">[41]</a></span>
them she had fallen as into a grateful release.</p>
<p>By the morrow her spirit was broken. Two
days later Mr. Incoul called with what success
the reader has been already informed,
and on that same evening in obedience to
the note, came Lenox Leigh.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_42">[42]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_IV">CHAPTER IV.</a><br/>
<small>AN EVENING CALL.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">When Leigh entered the drawing-room
he found Miss Barhyte already there.
“It is good of you to come,” she said, by
way of greeting.</p>
<p>The young man advanced to where she
stood, and in a tender, proprietary manner,
took her hand in his; he would have kissed
her, but she turned her face aside.</p>
<p>“What is it?” he asked; “you are pale as
Ophelia.”</p>
<p>“And you, my prince, as inquisitive as
Hamlet.”</p>
<p>She led him to a seat and found one for
herself. Her eyes rested in his own, and for
a moment both were silent.</p>
<p>“Lenox,” she asked at last, “do you know
Mr. Incoul?”</p>
<p>“Yes, of course; every one does.”</p>
<p>“I mean do you know him well?”</p>
<p>“I never said ten words to him, nor he to
me.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_43">[43]</a></span></p>
<p>“So much the better. What do you suppose
he did the other evening after you went
away?”</p>
<p>“Really, I have no idea, but if you wish
me to draw on my imagination, I suppose he
went away too.”</p>
<p>“He offered himself.”</p>
<p>“For what?”</p>
<p>“To me.”</p>
<p>“Maida, that mummy! You are joking.”</p>
<p>“No, I am not joking, nor was he.”</p>
<p>“Well, what then?”</p>
<p>“Then, as you say, he went away.”</p>
<p>“And what did you do?”</p>
<p>“I went away too.”</p>
<p>“Be serious; tell me about it.”</p>
<p>“He came here this afternoon, and I—well—I
am to be Mrs. Incoul.”</p>
<p>Lenox bit his lip. Into his face there came
an expression of angered resentment. He
stood up from his seat; the girl put out her
hand as though to stay him: “Lenox, I had
to,” she cried. But he paid no attention to
her words and crossed the room.</p>
<p>On the mantel before him was a clock that
ticked with a low, dolent moan, and for some
time he stood looking at it as were it an object
of peculiar interest which he had never
before enjoyed the leisure to examine. But<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_44">[44]</a></span>
the clock might have swooned from internal
pain, he neither saw nor heard it; his thoughts
circled through episodes of the winter back
to the forest and the fringes of the summer
sea. And slowly the anger gave way to wonder,
and presently the wonder faded and in
its place there came a sentiment like that of
sorrow, a doubled sorrow in whose component
parts there was both pity and distress.</p>
<p>It is said that the rich are without appreciation
of their wealth until it is lost or endangered,
and it was not until that evening
that Lenox Leigh appreciated at its worth
the loveliness that was slipping from him.
He knew then that he might tread the highroads
and faubourgs of two worlds with the
insistence of the Wandering Jew, and yet find
no one so delicious as she. And in the first
flood of his anger he felt as were he being
robbed, as though the one thing that had
lifted him out of the brutal commonplaces of
the every day was being caught up and carried
beyond the limits of vision. And into
this resentment there came the suspicion that
he was not alone being robbed, that he was
being cheated to boot, that the love which he
had thought to receive as he had seemed to
give love before, was an illusory representation,
a phantom constructed of phrases.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_45">[45]</a></span></p>
<p>But this suspicion faded; he knew untold
that the girl’s whole heart was his, had been
his, was yet his and probably would be his
for all of time, till the grave opened and
closed again. And then the wonder came.
He knew, none better, the purity of her
heart, and knowing, too, her gentleness, the
sweetness of her nature, her abnegation of
self, he began to understand that some tragedy
had been enacted which he had not been
called upon to witness. Of her circumstances
he had been necessarily informed. But in
the sensitiveness of her refinement the girl
had shrunk from unveiling to a lover’s eyes
the increasing miseries of her position, and
of the poignancy of those miseries he had
now, uninformed, an inkling. If she sold
herself, surely it was because the sale was
imperative. The white impassible face of
the girl’s mother rose before him and then,
at once, he understood her cry, “Lenox, I
had to.”</p>
<p>As he moved from her, Maida had seen the
anger, and knowing the anger to be as just
as justice ever is, she shook her head in helpless
grief, yet her eyes were tearless as had
she no tears left to shed. She had seen the
anger, but ignorant of the phases of thought
by which it had been transfigured she stole<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_46">[46]</a></span>
up to where he stood and touched his arm
with a shrinking caress.</p>
<p>He turned and would have caught her to
him, but she drew back, elusively, as might a
swan. “No, not that, Lenox. Only say
that you do not hate me. Lenox, if you only
knew. To me it is bitterer than death. You
are the whole world to me, yet never must I
see you again. If I could but tell you all. If
I could but tell him all, if there were anything
that I could do or say, but there is
nothing, nothing,” she added pensively, “except
submission.”</p>
<p>Her voice had sunk into a whisper: she
was pleading as much with herself as with
him. Her arms were pendant and her eyes
downcast. On the mantel the clock kept up
its low, dolorous moan, as though in sympathy
with her woe. “Nothing,” she repeated.</p>
<p>“But surely it need not be. Things cannot
be so bad as that—Maida, I cannot lose
you. If nothing else can be done, let us
go away; at its best New York is tiresome;
we could both leave it without a regret or a
wish to return. And then, there is Italy; we
have but to choose. Why, I could take a
palace on the Grand Canal for less than I pay
for my rooms at the Cumberland. And you<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_47">[47]</a></span>
would love Venice; and in winter there is
Capri and Sorrento and Palermo. I have
known days in Palermo when I seemed to be
living in a haze of turquoise and gold. And
the nights! You should see the nights!
The stars are large as lilies! See, it would be
so easy; in a fortnight we could be in Genoa,
and before we got there we would have been
forgotten.”</p>
<p>He was bending forward speaking rapidly,
persuasively, half hoping, half fearing, she
would accept. She did not interrupt him,
and he continued impetuously, as though
intoxicated on his own words.</p>
<p>“When we are tired of the South, there are
the lakes and that lovely Tyrol; there will be
so much to do, so much to see. After New
York, we shall really seem to live; and then,
beyond, is Munich—you are sure to love that
city.” He hated Munich; he hated Germany.
The entire land, and everything that
was in it, was odious to him; but for the
moment he forgot. He would have said
more, even to praises of Berlin, but the girl
raised her ringless hand and shook her head
wearily.</p>
<p>“No, Lenox, it may not be. Did I go with
you, in a year—six months, perhaps—we
would both regret. It would be not only<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_48">[48]</a></span>
expatriation; it would, for me at least, be
isolation as well, and, though I would bear
willingly with both, you would not. You
think so now, perhaps, I do not doubt”—and
a phantom of a smile crossed her face—“and I
thank you for so thinking, but it may not be.”</p>
<p>Her hand fell to her side, and she turned
listlessly away. “You must forget me,
Lenox—but not too soon, will you?”</p>
<p>“Never, sweetheart—never!”</p>
<p>“Ah, but you must. And I must learn to
forget you. It will be difficult. No one can
be to me what you have been. You have
been my youth, Lenox; my girlhood has
been yours. I have nothing left. Nothing
except regrets—regrets that youth should
pass so quickly and that girlhood comes but
once.”</p>
<p>Her lips were tremulous, but she was trying
to be brave.</p>
<p>“But surely, Maida, it cannot be that
we are to part forever. Afterwards—” the
word was vague, but they both understood—“afterwards
I may see you. Such
things often are. Because you feel yourself
compelled to this step, there is no reason why I,
of all others, should be shut out of your life.”</p>
<p>“It is the fact of your being the one of all
others that makes the shutting needful.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_49">[49]</a></span></p>
<p>“It shall not be.”</p>
<p>“Lenox,” she pleaded, “it is harder for me
than for you.”</p>
<p>“But how can you ask me, how can you
think that I will give you up? The affair is
wretched enough as it is, and now, by insisting
that I am not to see you again, you
would make it even worse. People think it
easy to love, but it is not; I know nothing
more difficult. You are the only one for whom
I have ever cared. It was not difficult to do
so, I admit, but the fact remains. I have loved
you, I have loved you more and more every
day, and now, when I love you most, when I
love you as I can never love again, you find
it the easiest matter in the world to come to
me and say, ‘It’s ended; <i>bon jour</i>.’”</p>
<p>“You are cruel, Lenox, you are cruel.”</p>
<p>“It is you that are cruel, and there the
wonder is, for your cruelty is unconscious, of
your own free will you would not know
how.”</p>
<p>“It is not that I am cruel, it is that I am
trying to do right. And it is for you to aid
me. I have been true to you, do not ask me
now to be false to myself.”</p>
<p>If at that moment Mrs. Bunker Hill could
have looked into the girl’s face, her suspicions
would have vanished into air. Maida<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_50">[50]</a></span>
needed only a less fashionable gown to look
like a mediæval saint; and before the honesty
that was in her eyes Lenox bowed his head.</p>
<p>“Will you help me?”</p>
<p>“I will,” he answered.</p>
<p>“I knew you would; you are too good to
try to make me more miserable than I am.
And now, you must go; kiss me, it is the
last time.”</p>
<p>He caught her in his arms and kissed her
full upon the mouth. He kissed her wet
eyes, her cheeks, the splendor of her hair.
And after a moment of the acutest pain of all
her life, the girl freed herself from his embrace,
and let him go without another word.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_51">[51]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_V">CHAPTER V.</a><br/>
<small>A YELLOW ENVELOPE.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">There is a peculiarity about Baden-Baden
which no other watering-place
seems to share—it has the aroma of a pretty
woman. In August it is warm, crowded,
enervating, tiresome as are all warm and
crowded places, but the air is delicately
freighted and a pervasive fragrance is discerned
even by the indifferent.</p>
<p>In the summer that succeeded Maida’s
marriage Baden was the same tame, perfumed
<i>zwei und funfzig</i> that it has ever been since
the war. The ladies and gentlemen who
were to regard it as a sort of continuation of
the Bois de Boulogne had departed never to
return. Gone was Benazet, gone, too, the
click of the roulette ball. The echoes and uproars
of the Second Empire had died away, as
echoes and uproars ever must, and in place
of the paint and cleverness of the <i>dames du-lac</i>
had come the stupid loveliness of the
<i>schwärmerisch Mädchen</i>.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_52">[52]</a></span></p>
<p>But though Paris had turned her wicked
back, the attitude of that decadent capital
in no wise affected other cities. On
the particular August to which allusion
is made, interminable dinners were consumed
by contingents from the politest
lands, and also from some that were semi-barbaric.</p>
<p>In the Lichenthal Allée and on the promenade
in front of the Kursaal one could hear
six languages in as many minutes, and given
a polyglottic ear the number could have been
increased to ten. Among those who added
their little quota to this summer Babel were
Mr. and Mrs. Incoul.</p>
<p>The wedding had been very simple. Mrs.
Barhyte had wished the ceremony performed
in Grace Church, and to the ceremony she
had also wished that all New York should
be bidden. To her it represented a glory
which in the absence of envious witnesses
would be lustreless indeed. But in this respect
her wishes were disregarded. On a
melting morning in early June, a handful of
people, thirty at most, assembled in Mrs.
Hildred’s drawing-room. The grave service
that is in usage among Episcopalians was
mumbled by a diligent bishop, there was a
hurried and heavy breakfast, and two hours<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_53">[53]</a></span>
later the bride and groom were on the deck
of the “Umbria.”</p>
<p>The entire affair had been conducted with
the utmost dispatch. The <i>Sunday Sun</i>
chronicled the engagement in one issue, and
gave the date of the wedding in the next. It
was not so much that Harmon Incoul was
ardent in his wooing or that Miss Barhyte
was anxious to assume the rank and privileges
that belong to the wedded state. The incentives
were other if equally prosaic. The
ceremony if undergone needed to be undergone
at once. Summer was almost upon
them, and in the code which society has
made for itself, summer weddings are reproved.
There was indeed some question of
postponing the rites until autumn. But on
that Mrs. Barhyte put her foot. She was
far from sure of her daughter, and as
for the other contracting party, who could
tell but that he might change his mind.
Such changes had been, and instances of
such misconduct presented themselves unsummoned
to the woman’s mind. The fish
had been landed almost without effort, a
fish more desirable than any other, a very
prize among fishes, and the possibility that
he might slip away and without so much
as a gill awry float off into clearer and<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_54">[54]</a></span>
less troubled seas, nerved her to her task
anew.</p>
<p>In the interview which she enjoyed with
her prospective son-in-law she was careful,
however, to display no eagerness. She was
sedate when sedateness seemed necessary, but
her usual attitude was one of conciliatory
disinterestedness. Her daughter’s choice she
told him had met with her fullest approval,
and it was to her a matter of deep regret that
neither her husband nor her father—the late
Chief Justice Hildred, with whose name Mr.
Incoul was of course familiar—that neither
of them had been spared to join in the expression
of her satisfaction. Of Maida it
was unnecessary to speak, yet this at least
should be said, she was young and she was
impressionable, as young people are apt to be,
but she had never given her mother cause for
the slightest vexation, not the slightest. “She
is a sweet girl,” Mrs. Barhyte went on to say,
“and one with an admirable disposition; she
takes after her father in that, but she has her
grandfather’s intellect.”</p>
<p>“Her beauty, madam, comes from you.”</p>
<p>To this Mrs. Barhyte assented. “She is
pretty,” she said, and then in the voice of an
actress who feels her rôle, “Do be good to
her,” she pleaded, “she is all I have.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_55">[55]</a></span></p>
<p>Mr. Incoul assured her that on that score
she need give herself no uneasiness, and a
few days before the wedding, begged as a
particular favor to himself that after the
ceremony she would take up her residence in
his house. The servants, he explained, had
been instructed in that respect, and a checkbook
of the Chemical Bank would be handed
her in defrayment of all expenses. “And to
think,” Mrs. Barhyte muttered to herself,
“to think that I might have died in Connecticut!”</p>
<p>The voyage over was precisely like any
other. There were six days of discomfort in
the open, and between Queenstown and Liverpool
unnumbered hours of gloomy and irritating
delay. Mrs. Incoul grew weary of the
captain’s cabin and her husband was not enthusiastic
on the subject of the quarters which
the first officer had relinquished to him. But
in dear old London, as all good Americans are
wont to call that delightful city, Mrs. Incoul’s
spirits revived. The difference between Claridge’s
and Rodick’s would have interested one
far more apathetic than she, and as she had
never before set her foot on Piccadilly, and as
Rotten Row and Regent Circus were as unfamiliar
to her as the banks of the Yang-tse-Kiang,
she had none of that satiated feeling<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_56">[56]</a></span>
of the <i>dejà-vu</i> which besets the majority of us
on our travels.</p>
<p>The notice of their arrival in the <i>Morning
Post</i> had been followed by cards without
limit and invitations without stint. An evening
gazette published an editorial a column
in length, in which after an historical review
of wealth from Plutus to the Duke of Westminster,
the reader learned that the world
had probably never seen a man so rich and
yet seemingly so unconscious of the power
which riches give as was Harmon Incoul,
esq., of New York, U. S. A.</p>
<p>During the few weeks that were passed in
London the bride and groom were bidden to
more crushes, dinners and garden parties
than Maida had attended during the entire
course of her bud-hood. There was the inevitable
presentation and as the girl’s face
was noticeably fair she and her husband
were made welcome at Marlborough House.
Afterwards, yet before the season drooped,
there was a trip to Paris, a city, which, after
the splendors of London, seemed cheap and
tawdry indeed, and then as already noted
came the villegiatura at Babel-Baden.</p>
<p>Meanwhile Maida had come and gone,
eaten and fasted, danced and driven in a
constant chase after excitement. To her<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_57">[57]</a></span>
husband she had acted as she might have
done to some middle-aged cousin with whom
she was not precisely on that which is termed
a familiar footing, one on whom chance not
choice had made her dependent, and to whom
in consequence much consideration was due.
But her relations will be perhaps better understood
when it is related that she had not
found herself physically capable of calling
him by his given name, or in fact anything
else than You. It was not that she disliked
him, on the contrary, in many ways he was
highly sympathetic, but the well-springs of
her affection had been dried, and the season
of their refreshment was yet obscure.</p>
<p>In the face of this half-hearted platonism
Mr. Incoul had displayed a wisdom which
was peculiar to himself; he exacted none of
those little tributes which are conceded to be
a husband’s due, and he allowed himself none
of the familiarities which are reported to be
an appanage of the married state. From the
beginning he had determined to win his wife
by the exercise of that force which, given
time and opportunity, a strong nature invariably
exerts over a weaker one. He was indulgent
but he was also austere. The ordering
of one gown or of five hundred was a
matter of which he left her sole mistress.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_58">[58]</a></span>
Had she so desired she might have bought a
jewelry shop one day and given it back as a
free gift on the morrow. But on a question
of ethics he allowed no appeal. The Countess
of Ex, a lady of dishonor at a popular
court, had, during the London season, issued
cards for a ball. On the evening on which
it was to take place the bride and groom had
dined at one house, and gone to a musicale
at another. When leaving the latter entertainment
Maida told her husband to tell the
man “Park Lane.” Mr. Incoul, however,
ordered the carriage to be driven to the
hotel.</p>
<p>“Did you not understand me?” she asked.
“I am going to the Countess of Ex’s.”</p>
<p>“She is not a woman whom I care to have
you know,” he replied.</p>
<p>“But the Prince is to be there!”</p>
<p>To this he assented. “Perhaps.” And
then he added in a voice that admitted of
no further argument, “But not my wife.”</p>
<p>Maida sank back in the carriage startled
by an unexperienced emotion. For the first
time since the wedding she could have
kissed the man whose name she bore. It
was in this way that matters shaped themselves.</p>
<p>Soon after reaching Paris, Mr. Blydenburg<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_59">[59]</a></span>
called. He had brought his daughter abroad
because he did not know what else to do
with her, and now that he was on the Continent
he did not know what to do with himself.
He explained these pre-occupations
and Mr. Incoul suggested that in the general
exodus they should all go to Germany. To
this suggestion Blydenburg gave a ready assent
and that very day purchased a translation
of Tacitus, a copy of Mr. Baring-Gould’s
Germany, a Baedeker, and a remote edition
of Murray.</p>
<p>At the appointed date the little party
started for Cologne, where, after viewing a
bone of the fabulous virgin Undecemilla,
they drifted to Frankfort and from there
reached the Oos. In Baden, Blydenburg
and his daughter elected domicile at the Englischerhof,
while through the foresight of a
courier, good-looking, polyglottic, idle and
useful, the Incouls found a spacious apartment
in the Villa Wilhelmina, a belonging of
the Mesmer House.</p>
<p>In the drawer of the table which Maida
selected as a suitable place for superfluous
rings was a yellow envelope addressed to the
Gräfin von Adelsburg. On the back was an
attempt at addition, a double column of
figures which evidently represented the hotel<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_60">[60]</a></span>
expenses of the lady to whom the envelope
was addressed. The figures were marked
carefully that no mistake should be possible,
but the sum total had been jotted down in
hurried numerals, as though the mathematician
had been irritated at the amount, while
under all, in an indignant scrawl, was the
legend “S. T.”</p>
<p>Maida was the least inquisitive of mortals,
but one evening, a week or ten days after her
arrival, when she happened to be sitting in
company with the Blydenburgs and her husband
on the broad terrace that fronts the
Kursaal, she alluded, for the mere sake of
conversation, to the envelope which she
had found. The Gräfin von Adelsburg it
then appeared was the name with which the
Empress of a neighboring realm was accustomed
to veil her rank, and the legend it was
suggested could only stand for <i>schrechlich
theuer</i>, frightfully dear. The Empress had
vacated the Villa Wilhelmina but a short
time before and it seemed not improbable
that the figures and conclusion were in her
own imperial hand.</p>
<p>While this subject was under discussion
the Prince of Albion sauntered down the
walk. He was a handsome man, with blue
projecting eyes, somewhat stout, perhaps,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_61">[61]</a></span>
but not obese. In his train were two ladies
and a few men. As he was about to pass
Mrs. Incoul he stopped and raised his hat.
It was of soft felt, she noticed, and his coat
was tailless. He uttered a few amiable commonplaces
and then moved on. The terrace
had become very crowded. The little
party had found seats near the musicians,
and from either side came a hum of voices.
A Saxon halted before them, designating
with pointing finger the retreating back of
the Prince, his companion, a pinguid woman
who looked as though she lived on fish,
shouted, “<i>Herr Jesus! ist es ja möglich</i>,”
and hurried on for a closer view. Near by
was a group of Brazilians and among them a
pretty girl in a fantastic gown, whose voice
was like the murmur of birds. To the left
were some Russians conversing in a hard,
cruel French. The girl seemed to have interested
them. “But why,” asked one, “but
why is it that she wears such loud colors?”
To which another, presumably the wit of
the party, answered idly, “Who knows, she
may be deaf.” And immediately behind Mrs.
Incoul were two young Americans, wonderfully
well dressed, who were exchanging
chaste anecdotes and recalling recent adventures
with an accompaniment of smothered<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_62">[62]</a></span>
laughter that was fathomless in its
good-fellowship.</p>
<p>Maida paid no attention to the conversation
about her. She was thinking of the yellow
envelope, and for the first time she began to
form some conception of her husband’s
wealth. Apparently he thought nothing of
prices that seemed exorbitant to one whose
coffers notoriously overflowed. She had
never spoken to him about money, nor he to
her; she knew merely that his purse was open;
yet, as is usual with one who has been obliged
to count the pennies, she had in her recent
shopping often hesitated and refused to buy.
In Paris she had chaffered over handkerchiefs
and been alarmed at Doucet’s bill. Indeed
at Virot’s when she told that poetic milliner
what she wished to pay for a bonnet, Virot,
smiling almost with condescension, had said
to her, “The <i>chapeau</i> that madame wants
is surely a <i>chapeau en Espagne</i>.”</p>
<p>And now for the first time she began to
understand. She saw how much was hers,
how ungrudgingly it was given, how easy her
path was made, how pleasant it might be for
the rest of her days, and she half-turned and
looked at her husband. If she could only
forget, she thought, only forget and begin
anew. If she could but tell him all! She<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_63">[63]</a></span>
moaned to herself. The moon was shining
behind the Kursaal and in the air was the
usual caress. The musicians, who had just
attacked and subdued the Meistersänger,
began a sob of Weber’s that had been
strangled into a waltz, and as the measures
flowed they brought her that pacification
which music alone can bring.</p>
<p>The past was over and done, ill-done, she
knew, but above it might grow such weeds of
forgetfulness as would hide it even from herself.
In a semi-unconsciousness of her surroundings
she stared like a pretty sphinx
into the future. The waltz swooned in its
ultimate accords, but she had ceased to hear;
it had lulled and left her; her thoughts
roamed far off into distant possibilities; she
was dreaming with eyes wide open.</p>
<p>Abruptly the orchestra attacked a score that
was seasoned with red pepper—the can-can
of an opéra-bouffe: the notes exploded like
fire crackers, and in the explosion brought
vistas of silk stockings, whirlwinds of disordered
skirts, the heat and frenzy of an
orgy. And then, as the riot mounted like a
flame, suddenly in a clash and shudder of
brass the uproar ceased.</p>
<p>Maida, aroused from her revery by the indecency
of the music, looked idly about her.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_64">[64]</a></span>
The Russians were drinking beer that was
as saffron as their own faces. The Brazilians
had departed. The young Americans were
smoking Bond street cigarettes which they
believed to be Egyptian, and discussing the
relative merits of Hills and Poole.</p>
<p>“While I was getting measured for that
top coat you liked so much,” said one,
“Leigh came in.”</p>
<p>“Lee? What Lee? Sumpter?”</p>
<p>“No; Lenox Leigh.”</p>
<p>“Did he, though? How was he?”</p>
<p>“Finest form. Said he would take in
Paris and Baden. He may be here now for
all I know. Let’s ask the waiter for a
Fremden-List.”</p>
<p>Maida had heard, and with the hearing
there had come to her an enveloping dread.
She felt that, did she see him, the love which
she had tried to banish would return unfettered
from its exile. Strength was not yet hers;
with time, she knew, she could have sworn it
would come; but, for the moment, she was
helpless, and into the dread a longing mingled.
At once, as though in search of a protection
that should guard her against herself, she
turned to her husband. To him, the Russians,
Brazilians, and other gentry had been
part of the landscape. He had little taste<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_65">[65]</a></span>
for music, and Blydenburg had bored him as
that amiable gentleman was accustomed to
bore every one with whom he conversed,
yet, nevertheless, through that spirit of paradox
which is common to us all, Mr. Incoul
liked the man, and for old association’s sake
took to the boredom in a kindlier fashion
than had it come from a newer and more
vivacious acquaintance. Blydenburg had
been explaining the value of recent excavations
in Tirynth, a subject which Mr. Incoul
understood better than the informist, but he
noticed Maida’s movement and stopped
short.</p>
<p>“Come, Milly,” he said to his daughter,
“let’s be going.”</p>
<p>Milly had sat by his side the entire evening,
in stealthy enjoyment of secular music,
performed for the first time in her hearing
on the Lord’s day. She was a pale, freckled
girl, with hair of the shade of Bavarian beer.
She was not beautiful, but then she was good—a
sort of angel bound in calf.</p>
<p>When Milly and her father had disappeared,
Maida turned to her husband again. “Do
you mind leaving Baden?” she asked.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul eyed her a moment. “Why?”
he asked. He had a trick of answering one
question with another, yet for the moment<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_66">[66]</a></span>
she wondered whether he too had heard the
conversation behind them, and then comforted
by the thought that in any case the name of
Lenox Leigh could convey but little to him,
she shrugged her shoulders. “Oh, I don’t
know,” she said; “I don’t like it; it’s hot
and crowded. I think I would like the seashore
better.”</p>
<p>“Very good,” he answered; “whatever
you prefer. I will speak to Karl to-night.”
(Karl was the courier.) “I don’t suppose,”
he added, reflectively, “that you would care
for Trouville—I know I should not.”</p>
<p>He had risen, and Maida, who had risen
with him, was looking down at the gravel,
which she toyed nervously with her foot.
The opera that had been given that evening
was evidently over. A stream of people
were coming from the direction of the theatre,
and among them was the Prince. He
was chatting with his companions, but his
trained eye had marked Mrs. Incoul, and
when he reached the place where she stood
he stopped again.</p>
<p>“You didn’t go in to-night,” he said, collectively.
“It was rather good, too.” And
then, without waiting for an answer, he continued:
“Won’t you both dine with us to-morrow?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_67">[67]</a></span></p>
<p>“Oh, we can’t,” Maida answered. She
was tormented with the thought that at any
moment Lenox might appear. “We can’t;
we are going away.”</p>
<p>The Prince smiled in his brown beard.
Americans were popular with him. He liked
their freedom. There was, he knew, barely
one woman in Baden, not utterly bedridden,
who would have taken his invitation so
lightly. “I am sorry,” he said, and he spoke
sincerely. Like any other sensible man, he
liked beauty and he liked it near him. He
knew that Mrs. Incoul had been recently
married, and in his own sagacious way, <i>il
posait des jalons</i>. “You are to be at Ballaster
in the autumn, I hear.” Ballaster was
a commodious shooting-box in Scotland, the
possession of an hospitable peer.</p>
<p>“Yes, I believe we are,” Maida answered.</p>
<p>“I hope to see you there,” and with these
historic words, Prince Charming departed.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_68">[68]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_VI">CHAPTER VI.</a><br/>
<small>BIARRITZ</small></h2>
<p class="cap">After a frühstück of coffee and honey,
to which the inn-keeper, out of compliment
to the nationality of his guest, had
added an ear of green corn—a combination,
be it said, that no one but a German could
have imagined—Mr. Incoul went in search
of his friend.</p>
<p>He had questioned Karl, and the courier
had spoken of Ostend with such enthusiasm
that his employer suspected him of some
personal interest in the place and struck it at
once from the list of possible resorts which
he had been devising. On the subject of
other <i>bains de mer</i> the man was less communicative.
There was, he said, nothing
attractive about Travemunde, except the
name; Scheveningen was apt to be chilly;
Trouville he rather favored, but to his thinking
Ostend was preferable.</p>
<p>When the courier had gone Mr. Incoul
ran his eye down a mental map of the coast<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_69">[69]</a></span>
of France, and just as it reached the Spanish
frontier he remembered that some one in his
hearing had recently sounded the attractions
of Biarritz. On that seaboard he ultimately
decided, and it was with the idea that Blydenburg
might go further and fare worse that he
sought his friend and suggested the advantages
of a trip to the Basque country.</p>
<p>Mr. Blydenburg had few objections to
make. He had taken very kindly to the
consumption of beer, but beer had not agreed
with him, and he admitted, did he stay in
Baden, that, in spite of the ill effects, he
would still be unable to resist the allurements
of that insidious beverage. “Act like
a man, then,” said Mr. Incoul, encouragingly;
“act like a man and flee from it.”</p>
<p>There was no gainsaying the value of this
advice, but between its adoption and a journey
to Biarritz the margin was wide. “It is
true,” he said, reflectively, “I could study
the language at the fountain-head.” (Mr.
Blydenburg, it may be explained, was a gentleman
who plumed himself on his familiarity
with recondite tongues, but one whose knowledge
of the languages that are current in
polite society was such as is gleaned from
the appendices of guide-books.)</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul nodded approvingly, “Certainly<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_70">[70]</a></span>
there would be no difficulty about
that.”</p>
<p>Blydenburg looked at him musingly for a
moment and nodded, too. “The name Biarritz,”
he said, “comes, I am inclined to believe,
from bi haritz—two oaks. Minucius
thinks that it comes from bi harri—two
rocks; but I have detected Minucius in certain
errors which has made me wary of
accepting his opinion. For instance, he
claims that the Basques are descendants of
the Phœnicians. Nothing could be more
preposterous. They are purely Iberian, and
probably the most ancient race in Europe.
Why, you would be surprised”—</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul interrupted him cruelly—“I
often am,” he said; “now tell me, will you be
ready this afternoon?”</p>
<p>“The laundress has just taken my things.”</p>
<p>“Send after them, then. I make no doubt
that there you can find another on the Bay of
Biscay.”</p>
<p>“I wonder what Biscay comes from? bi
scai, two currents, perhaps. Yes, of course,
I will be ready.” And as his friend moved
away, he pursed his lips abstractedly and
made a note of the derivation.</p>
<p>A courier aiding, the journey from Baden
to Biarritz can be accomplished without loss<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_71">[71]</a></span>
of life or reason. It partakes something of
the character of a zigzag, the connections
are seldom convenient, the wayside inns are
not of the best, but if people go abroad to
be uncomfortable, what more can the heart
desire? The Incoul-Blydenburg party, impeded
by Karl, a body-servant, and two
maids, received their allotted share of discomfort
with the very best grace in the world.
They reached Bayonne after five days, not, it
is true, of consecutive motion, but of such
consecutive heat that they were glad to descend
at the station of that excitable little city
and in the fresh night air drive in open carriages
over the few kilometres that remained
to be traversed.</p>
<p>It was many hours before the journey was
sufficiently a part of the past to enable the
travelers to look about them, but on the
evening succeeding their arrival, after a dinner
on the verandah of the Continental, they
sat with much contentment of spirit enjoying
the intermittent showers of summer stars and
the boom and rustle of the waves. Baden
was unregretted. To the left, high above, on
the summit of a projecting eminence, the
white and illuminated Casino glittered like
an ærian palace. To the right was the gardened
quadrangle of the former Empress of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_72">[72]</a></span>
the French, in the air was the scent of seaweed
and before them the Infinite.</p>
<p>“It’s quite good enough for me,” Blydenburg
confided to his companions, and the
confidence in its inelegant terseness conveyed
the sentiments of them all.</p>
<p>A week passed without bringing with it any
incident worthy of record. In the mornings
they met at the Moorish Pavilion which stands
on the shore and there lounged or bathed.
Maida’s beauty necessarily attracted much
attention, and when she issued in a floating
wrapper from the sedan-chair in which she
allowed herself to be carried from the Pavilion
to the sea, a number of amateurs who stood
each day just out of reach of the waves, expressed
their admiration in winning gutturals.</p>
<p>She was, assuredly, very beautiful, particularly
so in comparison with the powdered
sallowness of the ladies from Spain, and
when, with a breezy gesture of her own, she
tossed her wrap to the bather and with sandaled
feet and a white and clinging costume
of serge she stepped to the water there was
one on-looker who bethought him of a nymph
of the Ægean Sea. She was a good swimmer,
as the American girl often is, and she
breasted and dived through the wonderful
waves with an intrepidity such as the accompanying<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_73">[73]</a></span>
<i>baigneur</i> had been rarely called upon
to restrain.</p>
<p>From the shade of beach chairs, large and
covered like wicker tents, her husband and
the Blydenburgs would watch her prowess,
and when, after a final ride on the crest of
some great billow, she would be tossed breathless
and deliciously disheveled into the
steadying arms of the bather, the amateurs
were almost tempted to applaud.</p>
<p>In the afternoons there were drives and
excursions. One day to Bayonne along the
white, hard road that skirts the Chambre
d’Amour, through the peace and quiet of
Aiglet and on through kilometres of pines to
the Adour, a river so beautiful in itself that
all the ingenuity of man has been unable to
make it wholly hideous, and thence by its
banks to the outlying gardens of the city.</p>
<p>On other days they would loiter on the
cliffs that overhang the Côte des Basques, or
push on to Bidart, a chromatic village where
the inhabitants are so silent that one might
fancy them enchanted by the mellow marvels
of their afternoons.</p>
<p>But of all other places Maida preferred
Saint Jean-de-Luz. It lies near the frontier
on a bay of the tenderest blue, and for background
it has the hazy amethyst of the neighborly<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_74">[74]</a></span>
Pyrenees. The houses are rainbows of
blended colors; from the open door-ways the
passer, now and then, catches a whiff of
rancid oil, the smell of victuals cooked in
fat, from a mouldering square a cathedral
casts an unexpected chill, but otherwise the
town is charming, warm and very bright. On
the shore stands an inn and next to it a toy
casino.</p>
<p>To this exotic resort the little party drove
one afternoon. It had been originally arranged
to pass the day there, but on the day
for which the excursion was planned, a <i>Course
Landaise</i> was announced at Biarritz, and it
was then decided that they should first view
the <i>course</i> and dine afterwards at Saint Jean.
At first both Maida and Miss Blydenburg
refused to attend the performance and it was
not until they were assured that it was a bull-fight
for ladies in which there was no shedding
of blood that they consented to be
present. The spectacle which they then witnessed
was voted most agreeable. The bulls,
which turned out to be heifers, very lithe and
excitable, were housed in boxed stalls, which
bore their respective names: Isabel, Rosa,
Paquita, Adelaide, Carlota and Sofia. The
ring itself was an improvised arrangement
constructed in a great racquet court. The<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_75">[75]</a></span>
spectators, according to their means, found
seats on either side, the poorer in the sun
and the more wealthy in the shaded Tribune
d’Honneur. After a premonitory blare from
municipal brass the quadrille entered the
arena. They were a good-looking set of
men, more plainly dressed than their bloodier
brothers of Spain, and very agile. Two of
them carrying long poles stationed themselves
at the sides, one, armed with a barb
laid himself down a few feet from Isabel’s
door, and a fourth threw his soft hat in the
middle of the ring, put his feet in it and
stood expectant. In a moment a latch was
drawn, Isabel leaped from her stall, bounded
over the prostrate form that pricked her on
her way and made a straight rush for the
motionless figure in the centre of the ring.
When she reached him he was in the air and
over her with his feet still in the hat. Isabel
was bewildered, instead of goring a man she
had run her horns into empty space and in
her annoyance she turned viciously at one of
the pole-bearing gentlemen who vaulted over
her as easily as were he crossing a gutter, but
in vaulting the pole slipped from him, and
amid the applause of the audience Isabel
chased him across the ring to a high fence
opposite, and to which he rose like a bird<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_76">[76]</a></span>
with Isabel’s horns on his heels. There was
more of this amusement, and then Isabel, a
trifle tired, was lured back to her box; Rosa
was loosed and the performance repeated.</p>
<p>The escapes seemed so hairbreadth that
Mr. Blydenburg announced his intention of
witnessing a genuine bull fight, and on the
way to Saint Jean urged his companions to
accompany him over the border and view the
real article. “There is one announced for
next Sunday,” he said, “at San Sebastian, a
stone’s throw from here.” The appetite of
all had been whetted, and during the rest of
the drive, Mr. Blydenburg discoursed on the
subject with such learning and enthusiasm
that even his daughter consented to forget
her Sabbath principles and make one of the
projected party.</p>
<p>When the meal was done, they went into
the toy Casino. There was a band playing at
one end of the hall, the which was so narrow
that the director had been obliged to select
thin musicians, and beyond was a paperless
reading-room, a vague café, a dwarf theatre,
and a salle-de-jeu in white and gamboge. In
the latter division, where the high life of Saint
Jean had assembled, stood a table that resembled
a roulette. In its centre were miniature
revolving bulls, which immediately<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_77">[77]</a></span>
attracted Mr. Blydenburg’s attention, and on
the green baize were painted the names of
cities.</p>
<p>“Banderilla! Ruego! Sevilla!” the croupier
called, as the party entered. In one hand
he held a rake, with which he possessed himself
of the stakes of those who had lost, and
with the other hand he tossed out coin to
those who had won. The machinery was
again set in motion, and when the impulse
had ceased to act he called out anew, “Espada!
Nero! Madrid!”</p>
<p>Mr. Blydenburg was thoroughly interested.
In the residue of twenty-five French lessons,
which he had learned in his boyhood from a
German, he made bold to demand information.</p>
<p>“It’s the neatest game in the world,” the
croupier replied; “six for one on the cities,
even on the colors, even on banderilla or espada,
and twenty for one on Frascuelo.”
And, as he gave the latter information, he
pointed to a little figure armed with a sword,
which was supposed to represent that famous
matador. “The minimum,” he added, obligingly,
“is fifty centimes; the maximum, forty
sous.”</p>
<p>“I’ll go Frascuelo,” said Blydenburg, and
suiting the action to the word, he placed a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_78">[78]</a></span>
coin on the table. Maida, meanwhile, had
put money on everything—cities, colors,
banderilla, espada, and Frascuelo as well.
To the surprise of every one, but most to
that of the croupier, Frascuelo won. Maida
saw twenty francs swept from her and forty
returned. Blydenburg, who had played a
closer game, received forty also, but he lost
nothing, and he beamed as joyously as had
the University of Copenhagen crowned an
essay of his own manufacture.</p>
<p>It was by means of these mild amusements
that the first week of their sojourn was
helped away. Through the kindness of an
international acquaintance, Mr. Incoul had
been made welcome at the Cercle de Biarritz,
and in that charming summer club, where
there is much high play and perfect informality,
he had become acquainted with a
Spaniard, the Marquis of Zunzarraga.</p>
<p>One day when the latter gentleman had
wearied of the columns of the <i>Epoca</i> and Mr.
Incoul, and sought in vain for some refreshment
from <i>Galignani</i>, they drew their chairs
together and exchanged cigarettes.</p>
<p>In answer to the question which is addressed
to every new-comer, Mr. Incoul expressed
himself pleased with the country,
adding that were not hotel life always distasteful<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_79">[79]</a></span>
he would be glad to remain on
indefinitely.</p>
<p>“You might take a villa,” the marquis
suggested. To this Mr. Incoul made no reply.
The nobleman fluttered his fingers a
moment and then said, “take mine, you can
have it, servants and all.”</p>
<p>The Villa Zunzarraga was near the hotel
and its airy architecture had already attracted
Mr. Incoul’s eye. It was a modern
improvement on a feudal château, there were
turreted wings in which the machicoulis
were replaced by astragals and a broad and
double stairway of marble led up to the main
entrance.</p>
<p>“If you have nothing better to do to-day,”
the marquis continued, “go in and take a
look at it. I have never rented it before, but
this summer the marquesa is with the queen,
my mistress, and I would be glad to have it
off my hands.”</p>
<p>After consulting Maida in regard to her
wishes, Mr. Incoul determined to act on the
suggestion, and that afternoon they went together
to view the villa. In its appointments
there was little fault to be found. There was
no vestibule, unless, indeed, the entrance hall,
which was large enough to accommodate a
small cotillon, could be so considered; on the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_80">[80]</a></span>
right were reception-rooms, to the left a dining-room,
all facing the sea, while at the rear,
overlooking a quiet garden that seemed to
extend indefinitely and lose itself in the lilac
fringes of the tamaris, was a library. On the
floor above were bed and sitting rooms. In
one wing were the offices, kitchen and servants’
quarters, in another was the coach-house
and stables.</p>
<p>Under the guidance of the host, Mr. Incoul
went to explore the place, while Maida remained
in the library. It was a satisfactory
room, lined on three sides with low, well-filled
book-cases, the windows were doors and extended
nearly to the ceiling, but the light fell
through pink awnings under which was a
verandah, with steps that led to the garden
below. From the walls hung selections of
Goya’s Proverbios and Tauromaquia, a series
of nightmares in black and white.
Among them was a picture of a lake of blood
haunted by evil spirits; a vertiginous flight
of phantoms more horrible than any Doré
ever saw; a reunion of sorcerers with cats
for steeds; women tearing teeth from the
mouths of the gibbeted; a confusion of demons
and incubes; a disordered dance of delirious
manolas; caricatures that held the
soul of Hoffmann; the disembowelment of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_81">[81]</a></span>
fantastic chulos; horses tossed by bulls with
chimerical horns; but best of all, a skeleton
leaning with a leer from the tomb and scrawling
on it the significant legend, <i>Nada</i>, nothing.</p>
<p>In one corner, on a pedestal, there glittered
a Buddha, the legs crossed and a smile
of indolent apathy on its imbecile features.
Behind it was a giant crucifix with arms outstretched
like the wings of woe.</p>
<p>Maida wandered from book-case to book-case,
examining the contents with incurious
eye. The titles were strange to her and new.
In one division were the works of Archilaus,
Albert le Grand, Raymond Lulle, Armand de
Villenova, Nostradamus, and Paracelsus, the
masters of occult science. Another was given
up to Spanish literature. There were the
poems of Berceo, the romancero of the church;
the codex of Alphonso X., the Justinian of
mediæval Spain; El Tesoro, a work on alchemy
by the same royal hand and the Conquista
d’ultramar. There was the Libro de
consejos, by Sanchez IV.; and Bicerro, the
armorial of the nobility, by his son, Alphonso
XI. Therewith was a collection of verse of
the troubadours, the songs of Aimeric de
Bellinsi, Foulque de Lunel, Carbonel, Nat
de Tours, and Riquier, the last of the knight-errants.
Then came the poems of Juan de<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_82">[82]</a></span>
Mena, the Dante of Castille; the Rabelaisian
relaxations of the Archbishop of Hita; the
cancionero of Ausias March, that of Baena,
of Stuñiga, and that of Ixar.</p>
<p>Another book-case was filled with the
French poets, from Villon to Soulary. The
editions were delicious, a pleasure to hold,
and many of them bore the imprint of Lemerre.
Among them was the Fleurs du Mal,
an unexpurgated copy, and by it were the
poems of Baudelaire’s decadent descendants,
Paul Verlaine and Mallarmé.</p>
<p>There were other book-cases, and of these
there was one of which the door was locked.
In it were Justine and Juliette, by the Marquis
de Sade; the works of Piron; the works
of Beroalde de Verville; a copy of Mercius;
a copy of Thérèse Philosophe; the De Arcanis
Amoris; Mirabeau’s Rideau levé; Gamaini,
by Alfred de Musset and George
Sand; Boccaccio; the Heptameron; Paphian
Days; Crébillon’s Sopha; the Erotika Biblion;
the Satyricon of Petronius; an illustrated
catalogue of the Naples Museum; Voltaire’s
Pucelle; a work or two of Diderot’s; Maiseroy’s
Deux Amies; the Clouds; the Curée;
everything, in fact, from Aristophanes to Zola.</p>
<p>The collection was meaningless to Maida,
and she turned aside and went out on the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_83">[83]</a></span>
verandah. Below, on the gravel walk, was a
cat with a tail like a banner, and a neck
furred like a ruff. Maida crumpled a bit of
paper and threw it down. The cat jumped
at it at once, toyed with it for a moment, and
then, sliding backwards with a crab-like movement,
its back arched, and its ears drawn
down, it caught a glimpse of Maida’s unfamiliar
figure, and fled to the bushes with a shriek
of feigned terror. A servant passed, and ignorant
of Maida’s presence, apostrophized the
retreating feline as a loafer and a liar.</p>
<p>A moment later Mr. Incoul and the marquis
reappeared.</p>
<p>“I have been admiring your Angora,”
Maida said, “but I fear I startled it.”</p>
<p>The marquis rubbed his hands together
thoughtfully. “It is a wonderful animal,” he
answered, “but it is not an Angora, it is a
Thibetian cat, and though it does not talk, at
least it converses. It is so odd in its ways
that I called it Mistigris, as one might a
familiar spirit, but my children prefer Ti-Mi;
they think it more Thibetian, I fancy.” He
coughed slightly and looking at the points of
his fingers, he added, “I will leave it with you
of course.”</p>
<p>And then Maida understood that the matter
was settled and that the house was hers.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_84">[84]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_VII">CHAPTER VII.</a><br/>
<small>WHAT MAY BE SEEN FROM A PALCO.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">The installation was accomplished without
difficulty. The marquis migrated
to other shores and it took Maida but a
short time to discover the pleasures of being
luxuriously housed. The apartment which
she selected for herself was composed of
four rooms; there was a sitting-room in an
angle with windows overlooking the sea and
others that gave on a quiet street which
skirted one wing of the villa. Next to it
was a bed-room also overlooking the street,
while back of that, on the garden side, was a
bath and a dressing-room. A wide hall that
was like a haunt of echoes separated these
rooms from those of her husband.</p>
<p>Through the street, which was too steep to
be much of a thoroughfare, there came each
morning the clinging strain of a pastoral
melody, and a pipe-playing goat-herd would
pass leading his black, long-haired flock to
the doors of those who bought the milk.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_85">[85]</a></span>
When he had gone the silence was stirred
by another sound, a call that rose and fell
with exquisite sweetness and died away in
infinite vibrations: it came from a little old
woman, toothless and bent, who, with summer
in her voice, hawked crisp gold bread of
crescent shape, vaunting its delicacy in birdlike
trills. There were other venders who announced
their wares in similar ways, and one, a
fisher, chaunted a low and mournful measure
which he must have caught from the sea.</p>
<p>It was pleasant to be waked in this wise,
Maida thought, and as she lay in her great
bed of odorous wood, she listened to the
calls, and when they had passed, the boom and
retreating rustle of the waves occupied and
lulled her. In such moments the thoughts
that visited her were impermanent and fleeting.
She made no effort to stay them, preferring
the vague to the outlined, watching
the changes and transformations of fancy as
though her soul and she were separate, as
were her mind a landscape, some</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i22">Paysage choisi,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Que vont charmant masques et bergamasques<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Jouant du luth et dansant et quasi<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Tristes sous leurs déguisements fantasques.<br/></span>
</div></div>
<p>The room was an accomplice of her languor.
The windows were curtained with filmy<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_86">[86]</a></span>
yellow. Before them were miniature balconies
filled with flowers, and as the sun rose
the light filtered through flesh-colored awnings
striated with ochre. The floor was a
mosaic of variegated and lacquered wood.
On either side of the bed were silk rugs, sea
green and pink, seductive to the foot; the
ceiling was a summer sky at dawn, a fresco
in cinnabar and smalt.</p>
<p>The Blydenburgs, less luxuriously inclined,
remained at the hotel. Mr. Blydenburg
had not as yet enjoyed an opportunity
of conversing in Basque; he had indeed
attempted to address a mildewed little girl
whom he encountered one day when loitering
on the cliffs, but the child had taken
flight, and a mule that was pasturing on a
bramble, threw back its ears, elongated its tail
and curving its lips, brayed with such anguish
that Mr. Blydenburg was fain to delay
his studies until fortune offered a more favorable
opportunity.</p>
<p>It was at San Sebastian, he thought, that
such an opportunity would be found ready
made, and on the morning of the projected
excursion he was in great and expectant
spirits.</p>
<p>The morning itself was one of those delicious
forenoons that reminded one of Veronese.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_87">[87]</a></span>
In the air was a caress and in the
breeze an exhilaration and a tonic. In the
streets and about the squares there was an
unusual liveliness, much loud talking, a great
many oaths, and the irritation and excitement
which is the prelude to a festival. The entire
summer colony seemed to be on its way
to Spain.</p>
<p>In the court-yard of the Villa Zunzarraga
four horses harnessed to a landau stood in
readiness. On the box the driver glistened
with smart buttons and silver braid. His
coat was short, his culottes were white, his
waistcoat red, and he had made himself
operatic with the galloons and trappings of
an eighteenth-century postilion. It was not
every day in the year that he drove to a
corrida. By way of preparation for the coming
spectacle, Karl, who stood at the carriage
door, had already engaged a palco.</p>
<p>When Blydenburg and Milly arrived, and
the party had entered the landau, there was a
brisk drive through the town and a long
sweep down the Route d’Espagne than which
even the Corniche is not more lovely. The
vaporous Pyrenees seemed near enough to
be in reach of the hand, the elms that lined
the roadside were monstrous, like the elms in
a Druid forest, the fields were as green as<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_88">[88]</a></span>
had they been painted. There were pink
villas with blinds of pale yellow, white houses
roofed with tiles of mottled red, gardens
splendid with the scent of honeysuckle, and
children, bright-eyed, clear-featured, devoured
by vermin and greed, ran out in a bold,
aggressive way and called for coin.</p>
<p>“<i>Estamos en España!</i>” The carriage had
come to a sudden halt. In the beauties
of the landscape the journey had been forgotten.
But at the driver’s word there came
to each of them that sudden thrill which
visits every one that crosses a new frontier.
Blydenburg looked eagerly about him. He
had expected to be greeted by alcaldes and
alguacils, he had fancied that he would view
a jota, or at the very least a roadside bolero.
“Are we really in Spain?” he wondered. In
places of ladies in mantillas and short skirts
there was a group of mangy laborers, the
alcaldes and alguacils were represented by a
sullen aduenaro, and the only trace of local
color was in a muttered “<i>Coño de Dios</i>”
that came wearily from a bystander. Certainly
they were in Spain.</p>
<p>The custom-house officer made a motion,
and the carriage swept on. To the left was
Fuenterrabia, dozing on its gulf of blue, and
soon they were in Irun. There was another<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_89">[89]</a></span>
halt for lunch and a change of horses, and
then, on again. The scenery grew wilder,
and the carriage jolted, for the road was
poor. They passed the Jayzquibel, the Gaïnchurisqueta,
the hamlet of Lezo, Passaje,
from whence Lafayette set sail; Renteria,
a city outside of the year of our Lord;
they crossed the Oyarzun, they passed Alza,
another stream was bridged and at last the
circus hove in sight.</p>
<p>The bull-ring of San Sebastian is sufficiently
vast for a battalion to manœuvre in
at its ease. It is circled by a barrier some
five feet high, back of which is another and
a higher one. Between the two is a narrow
passage. Above the higher barrier rise the
tendidos—the stone benches of the amphitheatre—slanting
upwards until they reach
a gallery, in which are the gradas—the
wooden benches—and directly over these,
on the flooring above, are the palcos or
boxes. Each box holds twenty people.
They are all alike save that of the President’s,
which is larger, decorated with hangings
and furnished with chairs, the other
boxes having only seats of board. Under
the President’s box, and beneath the tendidos,
is the toril from which the bulls are
loosed. Opposite, across the arena, is the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_90">[90]</a></span>
matedero, the gateway through which the
horses enter and the dead are dragged out.
In the passage between the two barriers are
stationed the “supes,” who cover up the
blood, unsaddle dead horses, and attend to
other matters of a similar and agreeable
nature. There, too, the carpenters stand
ready to repair any injury to the woodwork,
and among them is a man in black, who at
times issues furtively and gives a <i>coup de
grace</i> to a writhing beast. There also are
usually a few privileged amateurs who seek
that vantage ground much as the dilettanti
seek the side scenes of the theatre.</p>
<p>These arrangements, which it takes a paragraph
to describe, are absorbed at a glance,
but with that glance there comes an aftershock—a
riot of color that would take a
library to convey. For the moment the eye
is dazzled; a myriad of multicolored fans
are fluttering like fabulous butterflies; there
are unimagined combinations of insolent
hues; a multitude of rainbows oscillating in
a deluge of light. And while the eye is
dazzled the ear is bewildered, the pulse is
stirred. The excitement of ten thousand
people is contagious; the uproar is as deafening
as the thunder of cannon. And then,
at once, almost without transition, a silence.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_91">[91]</a></span>
The President has come, and the most magnificent
of modern spectacles is about to
begin.</p>
<p>Almost simultaneously with the appearance
of the chief magistrate of the town,
the Incouls and Blydenburgs entered their
box. There was a blast from a trumpet and
an official in the costume known as that of
Henri IV. issued on horseback from the
matedero. The ring which a moment before
had been peopled with amateurs was emptied
in a trice. The principal actor, the espada,
Mazzantini, escorted by his cuadrilla and followed
by the picadors, advanced to the centre
of the arena and there amid an explosion of
bravos, bowed with a grace like that which
Talma must have possessed, first to the President,
who raised his high hat in return, and
then in circular wise to the spectators.</p>
<p>He was young and exceedingly handsome,
blue of eye and clear-featured; he smiled in
the contented way of one who is sure of his
own powers, and the applause redoubled.
The Basques have made a national idol of
him, for by birth he is one of them and very
popular in Guipuzcoa. He was dressed after
the fashion of Figaro in the “Barbiere,” his
knee breeches were of vermilion silk seamed
with a broad spangle, his stockings were of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_92">[92]</a></span>
flesh color, he wore a short, close-fitting
jacket, richly embroidered; the vest was
very low but gorgeous with designs; about
his waist was a scarlet sash; his shoulders
were heavy with gold and on his head was a
black pomponed turban, the torero variety of
the Tam O’Shanter. His costume had been
imitated by the chulos and banderilleros.
Nothing more seductive could be imagined.
They were all of them slight, lithe and agile,
and behind them the picadors in the Moorish
splendor of their dress looked like giants on
horseback.</p>
<p>The President dropped from his box the
key of the toril. The alguacil is supposed
to catch it in his hat, but in this instance he
muffed it; it was picked up by another; the
alguacil fled from the ring, the picadors stationed
themselves lance in hand at equal distances
about the barrier, the chulos prepared
their mantles, there was a ringing fanfare, the
doors of the toril flew open, and a black
monster with the colors of his <i>ganaderia</i>
fastened to his neck shot into the arena.</p>
<p>If he hesitated no one knew it. There
was a confused mass of horse, bull and man,
he was away again, another picador was
down, and then attracted by the waving cloak
of a chulo he turned and chased it across<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_93">[93]</a></span>
the ring. The chulo was over the fence in a
second, and the bull rose like a greyhound
and crossed it, too. Truly a magnificent
beast. The supes and amateurs were in the
ring in an instant and back again when the
bull had passed. A door was opened, and
surging again into the ring he swept like an
avalanche on a picador, and raising him horse
and all into the air flung him down as it
seemed into the very pits of death. The
picador was under the horse and the bull’s
horns were seeking him, but the brute reckoned
without the espada. Mazzantini had caught
him by the tail, which he twisted in such exquisite
fashion that he was fain to turn, and
as he turned the espada turned with him.
The chulos meanwhile raised the picador over
the barrier, for his legs and loins were so
heavy with iron that once down he could not
rise unassisted. Across the arena a horse lay
quivering in a bath of gore, his feet entangled
in his entrails, and another, unmounted, staggered
along dyeing the sand with zigzags of
the blood that spouted, fountain-like, from his
breast. And over all was the tender blue of
the sky of Spain.</p>
<p>When Mazzantini loosed his hold, he stood
a moment, folded his arms, gave the bull a
glance of contempt, turned on his heel and<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_94">[94]</a></span>
sauntered away. The applause was such as
no <i>cabotin</i> has ever received. It was the delirious
plaudits of ten thousand people drunk
with the sun, with excitement—intoxicated
with blood. Mazzantini bowed as calmly as
were he a tenor, whose <i>ut de poitrine</i> had
found appreciation in the stalls. And while
the applause still lasted, the bull caught the
staggering, blindfolded, unprotected horse
and tossed him sheer over the barrier, and
would have jumped after him had he not
perceived a fourth picador ambling cautiously
with pointed lance. At him he made a fresh
rush, but the picador’s lance was in his neck
and held him away. He broke loose, however,
and with an under lunge disemboweled
the shuddering horse.</p>
<p>There was another blast of the trumpets,
the signal for the banderilleros whose office
it is to plant barbs in the neck of the bull—a
delicate operation, for the banderillero must
face the bull, and should he trip he is dead.
This ceremony is seldom performed until the
bull shows signs of weariness; then the barbs
act like a tonic. In this instance the bull
seemed as fresh as were he on his native
heath, and the spectators were clamorous in
their indignation. They called for more
horses; they accused the management of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_95">[95]</a></span>
economy; men stood up and shook their
fists at the President; it was for him to order
out fresh steeds, and, as he sat impassible,
<i>pollice verso</i>, as one may say, they shouted
“<i>Fuego al presidente, perro de presidente</i>”—dog
of a president; set him on fire. And
there were cat-calls and the screech of tin
horns, and resounding and noisy insults, until
the general attention was diverted by the
pose of the banderillas and the leaping and
kicking of the bull, seeking to free his neck
from the torturing barbs. At last, when he
had been punctured eight times, he sought
the centre of the ring, and stood there almost
motionless, his tufted tail swaying nervously,
his tongue lolling from his mouth, a mist of
vapor circling from his nostrils, seething
about his splendid horns and wrinkled neck,
and in his great eyes a look of wonder, as
though amazed that men could be crueler
than he.</p>
<p>Again the trumpets sounded. Mazzantini,
with a sword concealed in a muleta of bright
scarlet silk, and accompanied by the chulos,
approached him. The chulos flaunted their
vivid cloaks, and when the bull, roused by
the hated colors to new indignation, turned
to chase them, they slipped aside and in
the centre of the ring stood a young man<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_96">[96]</a></span>
dressed as airily as a dancer in a ballet, in a
costume that a pin would have perforated, and
before him a maddened and a gigantic brute.</p>
<p>In a second the bull was on him, but in
that second a tongue of steel leaped from the
muleta, glittered like a silver flash in the air,
and straight over the lowered horns it swept
and then cleaved down through the parting
flesh and touched the spring of life. At the
very feet of the espada the bull fell; he had
not lost a drop of blood; it was the supreme
expression of tauromaquia, the recognition
that skill works from force.</p>
<p>And then the applause! There was a
whirl of hats and cigars and cigarettes, and
had San Sabastian been richer there would
have been a shower of coin. Women kissed
their hands and men held out their arms to
embrace him. It was the delirium of appreciation.
And Mazzantini saluted and bowed
and smiled. He was quite at home, and
calmer and more tranquil than any spectator.
Suddenly there was a rush of caparisoned
mules, ropes were attached to the dead
horses, the bull was dragged out, the blood
was concealed with sand, the toilet of the
ring was made, the trumpets sounded and
the last act of the first of the wonderful
cycle of dramas was done.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_97">[97]</a></span></p>
<p>There were five more bulls to be killed
that day, but with their killing the action
with which these pages have to deal need not
be further delayed. From the box in the
sombra Mr. Incoul had watched the spectacle
with unemotional curiosity. Blydenburg,
who had fortified himself with the contents
of a pocket flask, manifested his earliest delight
by shouting Bravo, but with such a disregard
of the first syllable, and such an explosion
of the second, that Mr. Incoul
mistaking the applause for an imitation of
the bark of a dog had at last begged him to
desist.</p>
<p>The adjoining box was crowded, and
among the occupants was a delicious young
girl, with the Orient in her eyes, and lips that
said Drink me. To her the spectacle was
evidently one of alluring pathos. “<i>Pobre
caballo</i>,” she would murmur when a horse
fell, and then with her fan she would hide
the bridge of her nose as though that were
her organ of vision. But no matter how
high the fan might be raised she always managed
to see, and with the seeing there came
from her compassionate little noises, a mingling
of “<i>ay</i>” and “<i>Dios mio</i>,” that was most
agreeable to listen to. Miss Blydenburg,
who sat so near her that she might have<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_98">[98]</a></span>
touched her elbow, took these little noises
for signals and according to their rise and
fall learned when and when not to look
down into the terrible ring below.</p>
<p>In the momentary intermission that occurred
after the duel between the espada and
the first bull, a mozo, guided by Karl, appeared
in the box bearing with him cool
liquids from the caverns beneath. Blydenburg,
whose throat was parched with brandy
and the strain of his incessant shouts, swallowed
a naranjada at a gulp. Mr. Incoul
declined to take anything, but the ladies
found much refreshment in a concoction of
white almonds which affects the tonsils as
music affects the ear.</p>
<p>It was not until this potion had been absorbed
that Maida began to take any noticeable
interest. She had been fatigued by the
drive, enervated by the heat, and the noise
and clamor was certainly not in the nature of
a sedative. But the almonds brought her
comfort. She changed her seat from the rear
of the box to the front, and sat with one arm
on the balustrade, her hand supporting her
delicate chin, and as her eyes followed the
prowess of the bull she looked like some fair
Pasiphae in modern guise.</p>
<p>It must have been the novelty of the scene<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_99">[99]</a></span>
that interested her. The light, the unusual
and brilliant costumes, the agility of the
actors, and the wonder of the sky, entered,
probably, as component parts into any pleasure
that she experienced. Certainly it could
have been nothing else, for she was quick to
avert her eyes whenever blood seemed imminent.
The second bull, however, was far
less active than the first. He had indeed
accomplished a certain amount of destruction,
but his attacks were more perfunctory
than angered, and it was not until he had
been irritated by the colored barbs that he
displayed any lively sense of resentment.
Then one of the banderilleros showed himself
either awkward or timid; he may have been
both; in any event his success was slight, and
as the Spanish audience is not indulgent, he
was hissed and hooted at. “Give him a
pistol,” cried some—the acmé of sarcasm—“<i>Torero
de las marinas</i>,” cried others. He
was offered a safe seat in the tendidos. One
group adjured the President to order his instant
imprisonment. One might have thought
that the tortures of the Inquisition could not
be too severe for such a lout as he.</p>
<p>Maida, who was ignorant of the duties of
a banderillero, looked down curiously at the
gesticulating crowd below. The cause of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_100">[100]</a></span>
their indignation she was unable to discover,
and was about to turn to Mr. Blydenburg for
information, when there came a singing in
her ears. The question passed unuttered
from her thoughts. The ring, the people,
the sky itself had vanished. Near the toril,
on a bench of stone, was Lenox Leigh.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_101">[101]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_VIII">CHAPTER VIII.</a><br/>
<small>AN UNEXPECTED GUEST.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">Gradually the whirling ceased, the
singing left her ears. Leigh raised his
hat and Maida bowed in return. His eyes
lingered on her a moment, and then he
turned and disappeared.</p>
<p>“A friend of mine, Mr. Leigh, is down
there,” the girl announced. Her husband
looked over the rail. “He’s gone,” she
added. “I fancy he is coming up here.”</p>
<p>“Who’s coming?” Blydenburg inquired,
for he had caught the words.</p>
<p>“A friend of my wife’s,” Mr. Incoul answered.
“A man named Leigh—do you
know him?”</p>
<p>“Mrs. Manhattan’s brother, isn’t he? No,
I don’t know him, but Milly does, I think.
Don’t you, Milly?”</p>
<p>Milly waved her head vaguely. She indeed
knew the young man in question, but
she was not over-confident that he had ever
been more than transiently aware of her<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_102">[102]</a></span>
maidenly existence. She had, however, no
opportunity to formulate her uncertainty in
words. There was a rap on the door and
Leigh entered.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul rose as becomes a host. The
young man bowed collectively to him and the
Blydenburgs. He touched Maida’s hand and
found a seat behind her. A bull-fight differs
from an opera in many things, but particularly
in this, that there may be exclamations,
but there is no attempt at continuous conversation.
Lenox Leigh, though not one to
whom custom is law, said little during the rest
of the performance. Now and then he bent
forward to Maida, but whatever he may have
said his remarks were fragmentary and
casual. This much Miss Blydenburg noticed,
and she noticed also that Maida appeared
more interested in her glove than in the spectacle
in the ring.</p>
<p>When the sixth and last bull had been
vanquished and the crowd was leaving the
circus, Mr. Incoul turned to his guest, “We
are to dine at the Inglaterra, will you not
join us?”</p>
<p>“Thank you,” Lenox answered, “I shall
be glad to. I came here in the train and I
have had nothing since morning. I have
been ravenous for hours, so much so,” he<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_103">[103]</a></span>
added lightly, “that I have been trying to
poison my hunger by thinking of the dishes
that I dislike the most, beer soup, for instance,
stewed snails, carp cooked in
sweetmeats or unseasoned salads of cactus
hearts.”</p>
<p>“I don’t know,” Mr. Incoul answered
gravely. “I don’t know what we will have
to-night. The dinner was ordered last week.
They may have cooked it then.”</p>
<p>“Possibly they did. On a <i>fiesta</i> San
Sebastian is impossible. There are seven
thousand strangers here to-day and the accommodations
are insufficient for a third of
them.”</p>
<p>“I want to know—” exclaimed Blydenburg,
always anxious for information. They had
moved out of the box and aided by the
crowd were drifting slowly down the stair.</p>
<p>At the <i>salida</i> Karl stood waiting to conduct
them to the carriage.</p>
<p>“If you will get in with the ladies,” said
Mr. Incoul, “Blydenburg and myself will
walk. The hotel can’t be far.”</p>
<p>To this proposal the young man objected.
He had been sitting all day, he explained,
and preferred to stretch his legs. He may
have had other reasons, but if he had he said
nothing of them. At once, then, it was<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_104">[104]</a></span>
arranged that the ladies, under Karl’s protection,
should drive to the Inglaterra, and
that the others should follow on foot.</p>
<p>Half an hour later the entire party were
seated at a table overlooking the Concha.
The sun had sunk into the ocean as though
it were imbibing an immense blue syrup. On
either side of the bay rose miniature mountains,
Orgullo and Igueldo tiara’d with fortresses
and sloped with green. To the right
in the distance was a great unfinished casino,
and facing it, beneath Orgullo, was a cluster
of white ascending villas. The dusk was
sudden. The sky after hesitating between
salmon and turquoise had chosen a lapis
lazuli, which it changed to indigo, and with
that for flooring the stars came out and
danced.</p>
<p>The dinner passed off very smoothly. In
spite of his boasted hunger, Lenox ate but
sparingly. He was frugal as a Spaniard, and
in the expansion which the heavy wine of the
country will sometimes cause, Mr. Blydenburg
declared that he looked like one. Each
of the party had his or her little say about
the corrida and its emotions, and Blydenburg,
after discoursing with much learning on the
subject, declared, to whomsoever would listen,
that for his part he regretted the gladiators<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_105">[105]</a></span>
of Rome. As a topic, the bull fight was inexhaustible.
Every thread of conversation
led back to it, and necessarily, in the course
of the meal, Lenox was asked how it was
that he happened to be present.</p>
<p>“I arrived at Biarritz from Paris last
night,” he explained, “and when I learned
this morning that there was to be a bull-fight,
I was not in a greater hurry to do anything
else than to buy a ticket and take the train.”</p>
<p>“Was it crowded?” Blydenburg asked in
his florid way.</p>
<p>“Rather. It was comfortable enough till
we reached Irun, but there I got out for a
Spanish cigar, and when I returned, the train
was so packed that I was obliged to utilize a
first-class ticket in a third-class car. None
of the people who lunched at the buffet were
able to get back. I suppose three hundred
were left. There was almost a riot. The
station-master said that Irun was the head of
the line, and to reserve a seat one must sit in
it. Of course those who had seats were
hugely amused at those who had none. One
man, a Frenchman, bullied the station-master
dreadfully. He said it was every kind of an
outrage; that he ought to put on more cars;
that he was incompetent; that he was imbecile;
that he didn’t know his business. ‘It’s<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_106">[106]</a></span>
the law,’ said the station-master. ‘I don’t
care that for your law!’ cried the Frenchman.
‘But the Préfet, sir.’ ‘To blazes with your
Préfet!’ But that was too strong. The
Frenchman might abuse what he saw fit, but
the Préfet evidently was sacred. I suppose
it was treasonable to speak of him in that
style. In any event, the station-master called
up a file of soldiers and had the Frenchman
led away. The on-lookers were simply frantic
with delight. If the Frenchman had only
been shot before their eyes it would indeed
have been a charming prelude to a bull
fight.” And then with an air that suggested
retrospects of unexpressed regret, he added
pensively, “I have never seen a man shot.”</p>
<p>“No?” said Milly, boldly; “no more have
I. Not that I want to, though,” she hastened
to explain. “It must be horrid.”</p>
<p>Lenox looked up at her and then his eyes
wandered to Maida, and rested caressingly
in her own. But the caress was transient.
Immediately he turned and busied himself
with his plate.</p>
<p>“Are you to be in Biarritz long?” Mr.
Incoul asked. The tone was perfectly courteous,
friendly, even, but at the moment from
the very abruptness of the question Lenox
feared that the caress had been intercepted<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_107">[107]</a></span>
and something of the mute drama divined.
Mentally he arranged Mr. Incoul as one constantly
occupied in repeating <i>J’ai de bon tabac,
tu n’en auras pas</i>, and it was his design
to disarm that gentleman of any suspicion he
might harbor that his good tobacco, in this
instance at least, was an envied possession or
one over which he would be called to play
the sentinel. The rôle of <i>mari sage</i> was frequent
enough on the Continent, but few knew
better than Lenox Leigh that it is rarely
enacted in the States, and his intuitions had
told him long before that it was one for which
Mr. Incoul was ill adapted. Yet between the
<i>mari sage</i> and the suspicionless husband there
is a margin, and it was on that margin that
Lenox determined that Mr. Incoul should
tread. “No,” he answered at once, and without
any visible sign of preoccupation. “No,
a day or two at most; I am on my way to Andalucia.”</p>
<p>Blydenburg, as usual, was immediately interested.
“It’s very far, isn’t it?” he panted.</p>
<p>“Not so far as it used to be. Nowadays one
can go all the way in a sleeping car. Gautier,
who discovered it, had to go in a stage-coach,
which must have been tedious. But
in spite of the railways the place is pretty
much the same as it has been ever since the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_108">[108]</a></span>
Middle Ages. Even the cholera has been unable
to banish the local color. There are
trains in Seville precisely as there are steamboats
on the Grand Canal. But the sky is
the same, and in the Sierra Morena there are
still Moors and as yet no advertisements.”</p>
<p>“You have been there then?”</p>
<p>“Yes, I was there some years ago. You
ought to go yourself. I know of nothing so
fabulous in its beauty. It is true I was there
in the spring, but the autumn ought not to be
a bad time to go. The country is parched
perhaps, but then you would hardly camp
out.”</p>
<p>“What do you say, Incoul?” Blydenburg
asked. “Wouldn’t you like it?” he inquired
of Maida.</p>
<p>“I could tell better when we get there,”
she answered; “but we might go,” she added,
looking at her husband.</p>
<p>“Why,” said Blydenburg, “we could see
Madrid and Burgos and Valladolid. It’s all
in the way.”</p>
<p>Lenox interrupted him. “They are tiresome
cities though, and gloomy to a degree.
Valladolid and Burgos are like congeries of
deserted prisons, Madrid is little different
from any other large city. Fuenterrabia,
next door here, is a thousand times more interesting.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_109">[109]</a></span>
It is Cordova you should visit
and Ronda and Granada and Sevilla and Cadix.”
And, as he uttered the names of these
cities, he aromatized each of them with an
accent that threw Blydenburg into stupors
of admiration. Pronounced in that way they
seemed worth visiting indeed.</p>
<p>“Which of them do you like the best?”</p>
<p>“I liked them all,” Lenox answered. “I
liked each of them best.”</p>
<p>“But which is the most beautiful?”</p>
<p>“That depends on individual taste. I prefer
Ronda, but Grenada, I think, is most admired.
If you will let me, I will quote a
high authority:</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“‘Grenade efface en tout ses rivales; Grenade<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Chante plus mollement la molle sérénade;<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Elle peint ses maisons des plus riches couleurs,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Et l’on dit, que les vents suspendent leurs haleines,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Quand, par un soir d’été, Grenade dans ses plaines,<br/></span>
<span class="i6">Répand ses femmes et ses fleurs.’”<br/></span>
</div></div>
<p>In private life, verse is difficult of recitation,
but Lenox recited well. He made such
music of the second line that there came
with his voice the sound of guitars; the
others he delivered with the vowels full as
one hears them at the Comédie, and therewith
was a little pantomime so explanatory and
suggestive that Blydenburg, whose knowledge
of French was of the most rudimentary<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_110">[110]</a></span>
description, understood it all, and, in consequence,
liked the young man the better.</p>
<p>The dinner was done, and they moved out
on the terrace. The moon had chased the
stars, the Concha glittered with lights, and
before the hotel a crowd circled in indolent
coils as though wearied with the holiday.
There were many people, too, on the terrace,
and in passing from the dining-room the
little party, either by accident or design, got
cut in twain. For the first time since the
spring evening, Maida and Lenox were
alone. Their solitude, it is true, was public,
but that mattered little.</p>
<p>Maida utilized the earliest moment by
asking her companion how he got there.
“You should not have spoken to me,” she
added, before he could have answered.</p>
<p>“Maida!”</p>
<p>“No, you must go, you—”</p>
<p>“But I only came to find you,” he whispered.</p>
<p>“To find me? How did you know where
I was?”</p>
<p>“The <i>Morning News</i> told me. I was in
Paris, on my way to Baden, for I heard you
were there, and then, of course, when I saw
in the paper that you were here, I followed
after.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_111">[111]</a></span></p>
<p>“Then you are not going to Andalucia?”</p>
<p>“No, not unless you do.”</p>
<p>The girl wrung her hand. “Oh, Lenox,
do go away!”</p>
<p>“I can’t, nor do you wish it. You must
let me see you. I will come to you to-morrow—he
has an excellent voice, not so
full as Gayarré’s, but his method is better.”</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul had suddenly approached
them, and as suddenly Lenox’s tone had
changed. To all intents and purposes he
was relating the merits of a tenor.</p>
<p>“The carriage is here,” said Maida’s husband,
“we must be going; I am sorry we
can’t offer you a seat, Mr. Leigh, we are a
trifle crowded as it is.”</p>
<p>“Thank you, you are very kind. The
train will take me safely enough.”</p>
<p>He walked with them to the carriage, and
aided Maida to enter it. Karl, who had been
standing at the door, mounted to the box.
When all were seated, Mr. Incoul added:
“You must come and see us.”</p>
<p>“Yes, come and see us, too,” Blydenburg
echoed. “By the way, where are you stopping?”</p>
<p>“I shall be glad to do so,” Lenox answered;
“I am at the Grand.” He raised
his hat and wished them a pleasant drive.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_112">[112]</a></span>
The moon was shining full in his face, and
Miss Blydenburg thought him even handsomer
than Mazzantini. His good wishes
were answered in chorus, Karl nudged the
driver, and in a moment the carriage swept
by and left him standing in the road.</p>
<p>“What a nice, frank fellow he is,” Blydenburg
began; “so different from the general
run of young New Yorkers. There, I forgot
to tell him I knew his sister; I am sorry, it
would have seemed sort of friendly, made him
feel more at home, don’t you think? Not
but that he seemed perfectly at his ease as it
was. I wonder why he doesn’t marry?
None of those Leighs have money, have
they? He could pick up an heiress, though, in
no time, if he wanted to. Perhaps he prefers
to be a bachelor. If he does I don’t blame
him a bit, a good-looking young fellow—”</p>
<p>And so the amiable gentleman rambled
on. After a while finding that the reins of
conversation were solely in his own hands,
he took the fullest advantage of his position
and discoursed at length on the bull fight,
its history, its possibilities, the games of the
Romans, how they fared under the Goths,
what improvements came with the Moors,
and wound up by suggesting an immediate
visit to Fuenterrabia.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_113">[113]</a></span></p>
<p>For the moment no enthusiasm was manifested.
Mr. Incoul admitted that he would
like to go, but the ladies said nothing, and
presently the two men planned a little excursion
by themselves.</p>
<p>Miss Blydenburg had made herself comfortable
and fallen into a doze, but Maida
sat watching the retreating uplands with
unseeing eyes. Her thoughts had wandered,
the visible was lost to her. Who knows
what women see or the dreams and regrets
that may come to the most matter-of-fact?
Not long ago at the opera, in a little Italian
town, the historian noticed an old lady, one
who looked anything but sentimental, for
that matter rather fierce than otherwise, but
who, when Cherubino had sung his enchanting
song, brushed away a furtive and unexpected
tear. <i>Voi che sapete</i> indeed! Perhaps
to her own cost she had learned and was
grieving dumbly then over some ashes that
the strain had stirred, and it is not impossible
that as Maida sat watching the retreating
uplands her own thoughts had circled back
to an earlier summer when first she learned
what Love might be.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_114">[114]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_IX">CHAPTER IX.</a><br/>
<small>MR. INCOUL DINES IN SPAIN.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">On the morrow Mr. Blydenburg consulted
his guide-books. The descriptions of
Fuenterrabia were vague but alluring. The
streets, he learned, were narrow; the roofs
met; the houses were black with age; the
doors were heavy with armorials; the windows
barred—in short, a mediæval burg that
slept on a blue gulf and let Time limp by
unmarked. Among the inhabitants were
some, he found, who accommodated travelers.
The inns, it is true, were unstarred, but the
names were so rich in suggestion that the
neglect was not noticed. Mr. Blydenburg
had never passed a night in Spain, and he
felt that he would like to do so. This desire
he succeeded in awakening in Mr. Incoul,
and together they agreed to take an afternoon
train, explore the town, pass the evening
at the Casino and return to Biarritz the
next morning. The programme thus arranged
was put into immediate execution;<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_115">[115]</a></span>
two days after the bull fight they were again
on their way to the frontier, and, as the train
passed out of the station on its southern
journey, Maida and Lenox Leigh were preparing
for a stroll on the sands.</p>
<p>There is at Biarritz a division of the shore
which, starting from the ruins of a corsair’s
castle, extends on to Saint-Jean-de-Luz. It
is known as the Côte des Basques. On one
side are the cliffs, on the other the sea, and
between the two is a broad avenue which almost
disappears when the tide is high. The
sand is fine as face powder, <i>nuance</i> Rachel,
packed hard. From the cliffs the view is
delicious: in the distance are the mountains
curving and melting in the haze; below, the
ocean, spangled at the edges, is of a milky
blue. Seen from the shore, the sea has the
color of absinthe, an opalescent green, entangled
and fringed with films of white; here
the mountains escape in the perspective, and
as the sun sinks the cliffs glitter. At times
the sky is flecked with little clouds that
dwindle and fade into spirals of pink; at
others great masses rise sheer against the
horizon, as might the bastions of Titan
homes; and again are gigantic cathedrals,
their spires lost in azure, their turrets swooning
in excesses of vermilion grace. The only<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_116">[116]</a></span>
sound is from the waves, but few come to
listen. The Côte des Basques is not fashionable
with the summer colony; it is merely
beautiful and solitary.</p>
<p>It was on the downs that Maida and Lenox
first chose to walk, but after a while a sloping
descent invited them to the shore below.
Soon they rounded a projecting cliff, and
Biarritz was hidden from them. The background
was chalk festooned with green;
afar were the purple outlines of the Pyrenees,
and before them the ocean murmured its
temptations of couch and of tomb.</p>
<p>They had been talking earnestly with the
egotism of people to whom everything save
self is landscape. The encircling beauty in
which they walked had not left them unimpressed,
yet the influence had been remote
and undiscerned; the effect had been that of
accessories. But now they were silent, for
the wonder of the scene was upon them.</p>
<p>Presently Maida, finding a stone conveniently
placed, sat down on the sand and used
the stone for a back. Lenox threw himself
at her feet. From the downs above there
came now and then the slumberous tinkle
of a bell, but so faintly that it fused with the
rustle of the waves; no one heard it save a
little girl who was tending cattle and who<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_117">[117]</a></span>
knew by the tinkle where each of her charges
browsed. She was a ragged child, barefooted
and not very wise; she was afraid of strangers
with the vague fear that children have. And
at times during the summer, when tourists
crossed the downs where her cattle were, she
would hide till they had passed.</p>
<p>On this afternoon she had been occupying
herself with blades of grass, which she threw
in the air and watched float down to the
shore below, but at last she had wearied of
this amusement and was about to turn and
bully the cows in the shrill little voice which
was hers, when Maida and her companion
appeared on the scene. The child felt almost
secure; nothing but a bird could reach her
from the shore and of birds she had no fear,
and so, being curious and not very much
afraid, she watched the couple with timid, inquisitive
eyes.</p>
<p>For a long time she watched and for a long
time they remained motionless in the positions
which they had first chosen. At times
the sound of their voices reached her. She
wished she were a little nearer that she might
hear what they said. She had never seen
people sit on the beach before, though she
had heard that people sometimes did so, all
night, too, and that they were called smugglers.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_118">[118]</a></span>
But somehow the people beneath her
did not seem to belong to that category. For a
moment she thought that they might be guarding
the coast, and at that thought an inherent
instinctive fear of officials beat in her small
breast. She had indeed heard of female
smugglers; there was her own aunt, for instance;
but no, she had never heard of a
coast-guard in woman’s clothes. That idea
had to be dismissed, and so she wondered and
watched until she forgot all about them, and
turned her attention to a white sail in the open.</p>
<p>The white sail fainted in sheets of cobalt.
The sun which had neared the horizon was
dying in throes of crimson and gamboge. It
was time she knew to drive the cattle home.
She stood up and brushed her hair aside, and
as she did so, her eyes fell again on the
couple below. The man had moved; he was
not lying as he had been with his back to the
bluff; he was kneeling by his companion,
her head was on his shoulder, her arms were
about his neck, and his mouth was close to
hers. The little maid smiled knowingly; she
had seen others in much the same attitude;
the mystery was dissolved; they were neither
guards nor smugglers—they were lovers;
and she ran on at once through the bramble
and called shrilly to the cows.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_119">[119]</a></span></p>
<p>The excursionists, meanwhile, had reached
Hendaye and had been ferried across the
stream that flows between it and Fuenterrabia.
At the landing they were met by a
gentleman in green and red who muttered
some inquiry. The boatman undid the
straps of the valise which they bore, and this
rite accomplished, the gentleman in green
and red looked idly in them and turned as
idly away. The boatman shouldered the
valises again, and started for the inn.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul and his friend were both men
to whom the visible world exists and they followed
with lingering surprise. They ascended
a sudden slope, bordered on one side
by a high white wall in which lizards played,
and which they assumed was the wall of
some monastery, but which they learned
from the boatman concealed a gambling-house,
and soon entered a small grass-grown
plaza. To the right was a church, immense,
austere; to the left were some mildewed
dwellings; from an upper window a man
with a crimson turban looked down with indifferent
eyes and abruptly a bird sang.</p>
<p>From the plaza they entered the main
street and soon were at the inn. Mr. Incoul
and Blydenburg were both men to
whom the visible world exists, but they were<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_120">[120]</a></span>
also men to whom the material world has
much significance. In the hall of the inn
a chicken and two turkeys clucked with fearless
composure. The public room was small,
close and full of insects. At a rickety table
an old man, puffy and scornful, was quarreling
with himself on the subject of a <i>peseta</i>
which he held in his hand. The inn-keeper,
a frowsy female, emerged from some remoter
den, eyed them with unmollifiable
suspicion and disappeared.</p>
<p>“We can’t stop here,” said Blydenburg
with the air of a man denying the feasibility
of a trip to the moon.</p>
<p>On inquiry they learned that the town contained
nothing better. At the Casino there
were roulette tables, but no beds. Travelers
usually stopped at Hendaye or at Irun.</p>
<p>“Then we will go back to Biarritz.”</p>
<p>They sent their valises on again to the
landing place and then set out in search of
Objects of Interest. The palace of Charlemagne
scowled at them in a tottering, impotent
way. When they attempted to enter
the church, a chill caught them neck and
crop and forced them back. For some time
they wandered about in an aimless, unguided
fashion, yet whatever direction they chose
that direction fed them firmly back to the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_121">[121]</a></span>
landing place. At last they entered the
Casino.</p>
<p>The grounds were charming, a trifle unkempt
perhaps, the walks were not free from
weeds, but the air was as heavy with the odor
of flowers as a perfumery shop in Bond street.
In one alley, in a bower of trees, was a row of
tables; the covers were white and the glassware
unexceptionable.</p>
<p>“We could dine here,” Blydenburg said in
a self-examining way. A pretty girl of the
manola type, dressed like a soubrette in a
vaudeville, approached and decorated his
lapel with a tube-rose. “We certainly can
dine here,” he repeated.</p>
<p>The girl seemed to divine the meaning of his
words. “<i>Ciertamente, Caballero</i>,” she lisped.</p>
<p>Mr. Blydenburg had never been called <i>Caballero</i>
before, and he liked it. “What do
you say, Incoul?” he asked.</p>
<p>“I am willing, order it now if you care to.”</p>
<p>But the ordering was not easy. Mr. Blydenburg
had never studied pantomime, and
his gestures were more indicative of a patient
describing a toothache to a dentist than of an
American citizen ordering an evening meal.
“<i>Kayry-Oostay</i>,” he repeated, and then from
some abyss of memory he called to his aid detached
phrases in German.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_122">[122]</a></span></p>
<p>The girl laughed blithely. Her mouth
was like a pomegranate cut in twain. She
took a thin book bound in morocco from
the table and handed it to the unhappy gentleman.
It was, he found, a list of dishes and
of wines. In his excitement, he pointed one
after another to three different soups, and
then waving the book at the girl as who
should say, “I leave the rest to you,” he
dared Mr. Incoul to go into the Casino and
break the bank for an appetizer.</p>
<p>The Casino, a low building of leprous
white, stood in the centre of the garden. At
the door, a lackey, in frayed, ill-fitting livery,
took their sticks and gave them numbered
checks in exchange. The gambling-room
was on the floor above, and occupied the entire
length of the house. There, about a
roulette table, a dozen men were seated playing
in a cheap and vicious way for small
stakes. They looked exactly what they were,
and nothing worse can be said of them. “A
den of thieves in a miniature paradise,”
thought Mr. Blydenburg, and his fancy was
so pleasured with the phrase that he determined
to write a letter to the <i>Evening Post</i>,
in which, with that for title, he would give a
description of Fuenterrabia. He found a
seat and began to play. Mr. Incoul looked<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_123">[123]</a></span>
on for a moment and then sought the reading-room.
When he returned Blydenburg
had a heap of counters before him.</p>
<p>“I have won all that!” he exclaimed exultingly.
He looked at his watch, it was
after seven. He cashed the counters and together
they went down again to the garden.</p>
<p>The dinner was ready. They had one soup,
not three, and other dishes of which no particular
mention is necessary. But therewith was
a bottle of Val de Peñas, a wine so delicious
that a temperance lecturer suffering from
hydrophobia would have drunk of it. The
manola with the pomegranate mouth fluttered
near them, and toward the close of the meal
Mr. Blydenburg chucked her under the chin.
“Nice girl that,” he announced complacently.</p>
<p>“I dare say,” his friend answered, “but
I have never been able to take an interest in
women of that class.”</p>
<p>Blydenburg was flushed with winnings and
wine. He did not notice the snub and proceeded
to relate an after-dinner story of that
kind in which men of a certain age are said
to luxuriate. Mr. Incoul listened negligently.</p>
<p>“God knows,” he said at last, “I am not
a Puritan, but I like refinement, and refinement
and immorality are incompatible.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_124">[124]</a></span></p>
<p>“Fiddlesticks! Look at London, look at
Paris, New York even; there are women
whom you and I both know, women in the
very best society, of whom all manner of
things are said and known. You may call
them immoral if you want to, but you cannot
say that they are not refined.”</p>
<p>“I say this, were I related in any way, were
I the brother, father, the husband of such a
woman, I would wring her neck. I believe in
purity in women, and I believe also in purity
in men.”</p>
<p>“Yes, it’s a good thing to believe in, but
it’s hard to find.”</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul had spoken more vehemently
than was his wont, and to this remark he
made no answer. His eyes were green, not
the green of the cat but the green of a tiger,
and as he sat with fingers clinched, and a
cheerless smile on his thin lips, he looked a
modern hunter of the Holy Grail.</p>
<p>The night train leaves Hendaye a trifle
after ten, and soon a <i>sereno</i> was heard calling
the hour, and declaring that all was well. It
was time to be going, they knew, and without
further delay they had themselves ferried
again across the stream. The return journey
was unmarked by adventure or incident. Mr.
Blydenburg fell into a doze, and after dreaming<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_125">[125]</a></span>
of the pomegranate mouth awoke at Biarritz,
annoyed that he had not thought to
address the manola in Basque. At the station
they found a carriage, and, as Blydenburg
entered it, he made with himself a little
consolatory pact that some day he would go
back to Fuenterrabia alone.</p>
<p>The station at Biarritz is several miles from
the town, and as the horses were slow it was
almost twelve o’clock before the Continental
was reached. Blydenburg alighted there and
Mr. Incoul drove on alone to the villa. As he
approached it he saw that his wife’s rooms
were illuminated. For the moment he
thought she might be waiting for him, but at
once he knew that was impossible, for on
leaving he had said he would pass the night
in Spain.</p>
<p>The carriage drew up before the main
entrance. He felt for small money to pay the
driver, but found nothing smaller than a louis.
The driver, after a protracted fumbling, declared
that in the matter of change he was
not a bit better of. Where is the cabman
who was ever supplied? Rather than waste
words Mr. Incoul gave him the louis and the
man drove off, delighted to find that the old
trick was still in working order.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul looked up again at his wife’s<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_126">[126]</a></span>
window, but during his parley with the driver
the lights had been extinguished. He entered
the gate and opened the door with a
key. The hall was dark; he found a match
and lit it. On the stair was Lenox Leigh.
The match flickered and went out, but
through the open door the moon poured in.</p>
<p>The young man rubbed his hat as though
uncertain what to do or say. At last he
reached the door, “I am at the Grand, you
know,” he hazarded.</p>
<p>“Yes, I know,” Mr. Incoul answered, “and
I hope you are comfortable.”</p>
<p>Leigh passed out. Mr. Incoul closed and
bolted the door behind him. For a moment
he stood very still. Then turning, he
ascended the stair.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_127">[127]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_X">CHAPTER X.</a><br/>
<small>THE POINT OF VIEW.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">On leaving the villa Lenox Leigh experienced
a number of conflicting emotions,
and at last found relief in sleep. The
day that followed he passed in chambered
solitude; it was possible that some delegate
from Mr. Incoul might wish to exchange a
word with him, and in accordance with the
unwritten statutes of what is seemly, it behooved
him to be in readiness for the exchange
of that word. Moreover, he was expectant
of a line from Maida, some word
indicative of the course of conduct which he
should pursue, some message, in fact, which
would aid him to rise from the uncertainty
in which he groped. As a consequence he
remained in his room. He was not one to
whom solitude is irksome, indeed he had
often found it grateful in its refreshment,
but to be enjoyable solitude should not be
coupled with suspense; in that case it is uneasiness
magnified by the infinite. And if<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_128">[128]</a></span>
fear be analyzed, what is it save the dread of
the unknown? When the nerves are unstrung
a calamity is often a tonic. The worst that
can be has been done, the blow has fallen,
and with the falling fear vanishes, hope returns,
the healing process begins at once.</p>
<p>The uneasiness which visited Lenox Leigh
came precisely from his inability to determine
whether or not a blow was impending. As
to the blow, he cared, in the abstract, very
little. If it were to be given, let it be dealt
and be done with; that which alone troubled
him was his ignorance of what had ensued
after his meeting with Mr. Incoul, and his
incapacity to foresee in what manner the consequences
of that meeting would affect his
relations with Mr. Incoul’s wife.</p>
<p>In this uncertainty he looked at the matter
from every side, and, that he might get the
broadest view, he recalled the incidents connected
with the meeting. The facts of the
case seemed then to resolve themselves into
this: Mr. Incoul had unexpectedly returned
to his home after midnight, and had met a
friend of his wife’s descending the stair.
Their greeting, if formal, had been perfectly
courteous. The departing guest had informed
the returning husband at what hotel he was
stopping, and that gentleman had expressed<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_129">[129]</a></span>
the hope that he was comfortable. Certainly
there was nothing extraordinary in that.
People who dwelled in recondite regions
might see impropriety in a call that extended
up to and beyond midnight, whereas others
who lived in more liberal centres might consider
it the most natural thing in the world. It
was, then, merely the point of view, and what
was the point of view which Mr. Incoul had
adopted? If he considered it an impropriety
why had he seemed so indifferent? And,
if he considered it natural and proper, why
should he have been so damned civil? Why
should he have expressed the hope that his
wife’s guest was comfortable at a hotel?
Was the expression of that hope merely a
commonplace rejoinder, or was it an intentional
slur? Surely, every one possessed of
the brain of a medium-sized rabbit feels that
it is as absurd to expect an intelligent being
to be comfortable in a hotel as it is to suppose
that he can find enjoyment in an evening
party or amusement in a comic paper. Then
again, and this, after all, was the great question:
was the return of Mr. Incoul intentional
or accidental? If it was intentional, if he
had gone away intending that he would be
absent all night merely that by an unexpected
return he might verify any suspicions which<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_130">[130]</a></span>
he may have harbored, then in driving to his
door in a rumbling coach he had shown himself
a very poor plotter. On the other hand,
if the return were accidental had it served to
turn a suspicionless husband into a suspicious
one, and if it had so served, how far did
those suspicions extend? Did he think that
his wife and her guest had been occupied with
aimless chit-chat, or did he believe that their
conversation had been of a personal and intimate
nature?</p>
<p>As Lenox pondered over these things it
seemed to him that, let Mr. Incoul suspect
what he might, the one and unique cause for
apprehension lay in the attitude which Maida
had assumed when her husband, after closing
the door, had gone to her in search of an explanation.
That he had so gone there was
to him no possible doubt. And it was in the
expectancy of tidings as to the result of that
explanation that he waited the entire day in
his room.</p>
<p>But the afternoon waned into dusk and
still no tidings came. As the hours wore on
his uneasiness decreased. “Bah!” he muttered
to himself at last, “in the winter I gave
all my mornings to Pyrrho and Ænesidemus,
and here six months later during an entire
day I bother myself about eventualities.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_131">[131]</a></span></p>
<p>He sighed wearily with an air of self-disgust,
and rising from the sofa on which his
meditations had been passed he went to the
window. The Casino opposite was already
illuminated. “They will be there to-night,”
he thought. “I have been a fool for my
pains. If Maida hasn’t written it is because
there has been nothing to write. I will look
them up after dinner and everything will be
as before.” He took off his morning suit and
got himself into evening dress. He tied his
white cravat without emotion, with a precision
that was geometric in its accuracy, and to
hold the tie in place he ran a silver pin
through the collar without so much as pricking
his neck. He was thoroughly at ease. The
fear of the blow had passed. Pyrrho, Ænesidemus,
the whole corps of ataraxists had
surged suddenly and rescued him from the
toils of the inscrutable.</p>
<p>At a florist’s in the street below he found an
orchid with which he decked his button-hole,
and then in search of dinner he sauntered
into Helder’s, a restaurant on the main
street, a trifle above the Grand Hôtel. It
was crowded; there did not seem to be a
single table unoccupied. He hesitated for a
moment, and was about to go elsewhere
when he noticed some one signaling to him<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_132">[132]</a></span>
from the remoter end of the garden. He
could not at first make out who it was and it
was not until he had made use of a monocle
that he recognized a fellow Baltimorean, Mr.
Clarence May, with whom in days gone by he
had been on terms approaching those of intimacy.</p>
<p>Mr. Clarence May, more familiarly known
as Clara, was a pigeon-shooter who for some
years past had been promenading the side
scenes of continental life. He was well
known in the penal colonies of the Riviera,
and hand-in-glove with some of the most
distinguished <i>rastaquouères</i>, yet did he happen
in a proscenium it was by accident. In
appearance he was not beautiful: he was a
meagre little man, possessed of vague features
and an allowance of sandy hair so
undetermined that few were able to remember
whether or not he wore any on his face.
When he spoke it was with a slight stutter, a
trick of speech which he declared he had inherited
from his wet-nurse.</p>
<p>He rose from his seat, and hurrying forward,
greeted Lenox as though he had seen
him the week before. He was anything but
an idealist, yet he treated Time as though it
were the veriest fiction of the non-existent,
and he bombarded no one with questions as<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_133">[133]</a></span>
to what had become of them, or where had
they been.</p>
<p>“I have just ordered dinner,” he said, in
his amusing stammer, “you must share it with
me.” And Lenox, who had not a prejudice
to his name, accepted the invitation as
readily as it was made.</p>
<p>“I don’t know,” May continued, when
they were seated—“I don’t know whether
you will like the dinner—I have ordered
very little. No soup, too hot, don’t you
think? No oysters, there are none; all out
visiting, the man said; for fish I have substituted
a melon; fish, at the seaside, is
never good; then we are to have white
truffles, with a plain sauce, a chateaubriand,
salad, a bit of cheese—<i>voilà</i>! How will
that suit you?”</p>
<p>Lenox nodded, as who should say, had
I ordered it myself it could not be more to
my taste, and thus encouraged, May offered
him a glass of Amer Picon, a beverage that
smells like an orange and looks like ink.</p>
<p>The dinner passed off pleasantly enough.
The white truffles were excellent, and the
chateaubriand cooked to a turn. The only
fault to be found was with the Brie, which
May seemed to think was not as flowing as it
should be.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_134">[134]</a></span></p>
<p>“By the way,” he said at last when coffee
was served, “you know Mirette is here?”</p>
<p>“Mirette? Who is Mirette?”</p>
<p>“Why, good gad! My dear fellow, Mirette
is Mirette; the one adorable, unique, divine
Mirette. You don’t mean to say you never
heard of her!”</p>
<p>“I do, though perhaps she may have had
the good fortune to hear of me.”</p>
<p>“Heavens alive, man! don’t you read the
papers?”</p>
<p>Lenox smiled. “Why should I? I am
not interested in the community. It might
be stricken with dry-rot, elephantiasis and
plica polonica for ought I care. Besides,
there is nothing in them; the English papers
are all advertisements and aridity, the French
are frivolous and obscene. I mind neither
frivolity nor obscenity; both have their uses,
as flowers and cesspools have theirs; but I
object to them served with my breakfast. I
think if once a year a man would read a summary
of the twelvemonth, he would get in ten
minutes a digest of all that might be necessary
to know, and what is more to the point,
he would have to his credit a clear profit of
two hundred hours at the very least, and two
hundred hours rightly employed are sufficient
for the acquirement of such a knowledge of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_135">[135]</a></span>
a foreign language as will permit a man to
make love in it gracefully. No, I seldom read
the papers, so forgive my ignorance as to
Mirette.”</p>
<p>“After such an explanation I shall have
to. But if you care to learn by word of
mouth that which you decline to read in
print, Mirette is <i>premier sujet</i>.”</p>
<p>“In the ballet, you mean.”</p>
<p>“Yes, in the ballet, and I can’t for the life
of me think of a ballet without her.”</p>
<p>“She must have gone to your head.”</p>
<p>“And to every one’s who has seen her.”</p>
<p>“You say she is here?”</p>
<p>“Yes, she’ll be at the Casino to-night; I’ll
present you if you say so.”</p>
<p>“I might take a look at her, but I fancy I
shalt be occupied elsewhere.”</p>
<p>“As you like.” May drew out his watch.
“It’s after nine,” he added, “if we are
going to the Casino we had better be t-toddling.”</p>
<p>On the way there May entered a tobacconist’s,
and Lenox waited for him without.
As he loitered on the curb, Blydenburg
rounded an adjacent corner.</p>
<p>“Well,” exclaimed the latter, “you didn’t
see our friends off.”</p>
<p>“What friends?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_136">[136]</a></span></p>
<p>“The Incouls of course; didn’t you know
that they had gone?”</p>
<p>Lenox looked at him blankly. “Gone,”
he echoed.</p>
<p>“Yes, they must have sent you word.
Incoul seemed to expect you. They have
gone up to Paris. If I had known beforehand—”</p>
<p>Mr. Blydenburg rambled on, but Lenox no
longer listened. It was for this then that he
had been bothering himself the entire day.
The abruptness of the departure mystified
him, yet he comforted himself with the
thought that had there been anything abnormal,
it could not have escaped Blydenburg’s
attention.</p>
<p>“And you say they expected me?” he
asked at last.</p>
<p>“Yes, they seemed to. Incoul left good-bye
for you. When you get to Paris look
them up.”</p>
<p>While he was speaking May came out
from the tobacconist’s.</p>
<p>“I will do so,” Lenox said, and with a
parting nod he joined his friend.</p>
<p>As he walked on down the road to the
Casino, Mr. Blydenburg looked musingly
after him. He would not be a bad match
for Milly, he told himself, not a bad match<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_137">[137]</a></span>
at all; and thinking that perhaps it might be
but a question of bringing the two young
people together, he presently started off in
search of his daughter and led her, lamb-like,
to the Casino. But once there he felt
instinctively that for that evening at least
any bringing together of the young people
was impossible. Lenox was engaged in an
animated conversation with a conspicuously
dressed lady, whom, Mr. Blydenburg learned
on inquiry, was none other than the notorious
Mlle. Mirette, of the Théâtre National
de l’Opéra.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_138">[138]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XI">CHAPTER XI.</a><br/>
<small>THE HOUSE IN THE PARC MONCEAU.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">There had been a crash in Wall street.
Two of the best houses had gone under.
Of one of these the senior partner had
had recourse to the bare bodkin. For several
years previous his wife had dispensed
large hospitality from a charming hôtel just
within the gates of the Parc Monceau. At
the news of her ruined widowhood she fled
from Paris. In a week it was only her creditors
that remembered her. The hôtel was
sold under the hammer. A speculator
bought it and while waiting a chance to sell
it again at a premium, offered it for rent,
fully furnished, as it stood. This by the
way.</p>
<p>After the dinner in Spain, Mr. Incoul
passed some time in thought. The next
morning he sent for Karl, and after a consultation
with him, he went to the square
that overhangs the sea, entered the telegraph
office, found a blank, wrote a brief<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_139">[139]</a></span>
message, and after attending to its despatch,
returned to the villa. His wife was in the
library, and as he entered the room the
<i>maître d’hôtel</i> announced that their excellencies
were served.</p>
<p>Maida had never been more bewildering
in her beauty. Her lips were moist, and
under her polar-blue eyes were the faintest
of semicircles.</p>
<p>“Did you enjoy your trip to Fuenterrabia?”
she asked.</p>
<p>“Exceedingly,” he answered. But he did
not enter into details and the breakfast was
done before either of them spoke again.</p>
<p>At last as Maida rose from the table Mr.
Incoul said: “We leave for Paris at five this
afternoon. I beg you will see to it that your
things are ready.”</p>
<p>She steadied herself against a chair, she
would have spoken, but he had risen also
and left the room.</p>
<p>For the time being her mind refused to
act. Into the fibres of her there settled that
chill which the garb and aspect of a policeman
produces on the conscience of a misdemeanant.
But the chill passed as policemen
do, and a fever came in its place.</p>
<p>To hypnotize her thoughts she caught up
an English journal. She read of a cocoa that<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_140">[140]</a></span>
was grateful and comforting, the praises of
Pear’s Soap, an invitation from Mr. Streeter
to view his wares, a column of testimonials
on the merits of a new pill, appeals from
societies for pecuniary aid. She learned that
a Doré was on exhibition in New Bond
street, that Lady Grenville, The Oaks, Market
Litchfield, was anxious to secure a situation
for a most excellent under-housemaid,
that money in large amounts or small could
be obtained without publicity on simple note
of hand by applying personally or by letter
to Moss &amp; Lewes, Golden Square. She
found that a harmless, effective and permanent
cure for corpulency would be sent to
any part of the world, post-paid, on receipt
twelve stamps, and that the Junior Macready
Club would admit a few more members without
entrance fee. She read it all determinedly,
by sheer effort of will, and at last in
glancing over an oasis her eye fell upon a
telegram from Madrid which stated cholera
had broken out afresh.</p>
<p>She took the paper with her and hurried
from the room. In the hall her husband
stood talking to Karl. She went to him and
pointed to the telegram. “Is it for this we
are to leave?” she asked.</p>
<p>He read the notice and returned it. “Yes,”<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_141">[141]</a></span>
he answered, “it is for that.” And then it
was that both chill and fever passed away.</p>
<p>The journey from Biarritz was accomplished
without incident. On their previous
visit to Paris, they had put up at the Bristol
and to that hostelry they returned. The
manager had been notified and the yellow
suite overlooking the Palace Vendôme was
prepared for their reception. On arriving,
Maida went at once with her maid to
her room. Mr. Incoul changed his clothes,
passed an hour at the Hamman, breakfasted
at Voisin’s, and then had himself driven to a
house-agent.</p>
<p>The clerk, a man of fat and greasy presence,
gave him a list of apartments, marking
with a star those which he thought might
prove most suitable. Mr. Incoul visited
them all. He had never lived in an apartment
in Paris and the absence of certain
conveniences perplexed him. The last apartment
of those that were starred was near the
Arc de Triomphe. When he had been shown
it over he found a seat, and heedless of the
volubility of the concierge, rested his head
in his hand and thought. For the moment
it seemed to him as though it would be best
to return to New York, but there were objections
to that, and reflecting that there<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_142">[142]</a></span>
might be other and better arranged apartments,
he left the chattering concierge and
drove again to the agent’s.</p>
<p>“I have seen nothing I liked,” he said
simply.</p>
<p>At this the clerk expressed his intense surprise.
The apartment in the Avenue Montaigne
was everything that there was of most
fine, and wait, the Hospodar of Wallachia
had just quitted the one in the Rue de Presbourg.
“It astonishes me much,” he said.</p>
<p>The astonishment of the clerk was to Mr.
Incoul a matter of perfect indifference.
“Have you any private houses?” he asked.</p>
<p>“Ah, yes, particular hôtels.” Yes, there
was one near the Trocadero, but for his part
he found that the apartment in the Avenue
Montaigne would fit him much better. “But
now that I am there,” he continued, “I recall
myself of one that is enchanter as a subjunctive.
I engage you to visit it.” And thereupon
he wrote down the address of the house
in the Parc Monceau.</p>
<p>It was not, Mr. Incoul discovered, a large
dwelling, but the appointments left little to
be desired. In the dressing-rooms was
running water, and each of the bed-rooms
was supplied with gas-fixtures. He touched
one to see if it were in working order, and<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_143">[143]</a></span>
immediately the escaping ether assured him
that it was. He sniffed it with a feeling akin
to pleasure. One would have thought that
since he left Madison avenue he had not
enjoyed such a treat. There was gas to be
found in the dining-room, but the reception-rooms
were furnished with lamps and candelabras.
The bed-rooms were on the floor
above. One of these overlooked the park.
There was a dressing-room next to it, but
to the two rooms there was but one entrance,
and that from the hall. This little suite, Mr.
Incoul resolved, should be occupied by his
wife. Beyond, across the hall, was a sitting-room,
and at the other end of the house was
a second suite, which Mr. Incoul mentally
selected for himself.</p>
<p>He returned to the agent, and informed
him that the house suited him, an announcement
which the man received with an air of
personal sympathy.</p>
<p>“Is it not!” he exclaimed, “it made the
mouth champagne nothing but to think there.
And again, one was at home with one’s self.
Truly, the hôtel was beautiful as a boulevard.
Monsieur would never regret himself
of it. And had Monsieur servants? No,
good then. Let Monsieur not disquiet himself.
He who spoke knew of a cook, veritably<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_144">[144]</a></span>
a blue ribbon, and as to masters
of hôtel, why, anointed name of a dog, not
later than yesterday, he had heard that Baptiste—he
who had served the family of Cantacuzène—Monsieur
knew her, without doubt,
came to be free.”</p>
<p>In many respects Paris is not what it might
be. The shops are vulgar in their ostentation.
Were Monte Cristo to return he
would find his splendor cheap and commonplace.
In a city where Asiatic magnificence
is sold from misfit and remnant counters by
the ton, where emeralds large as swallows’
eggs are to be had in the side-streets at a
discount, where agents are ready to provide
everything from an opéra-seria to a shoelace,
the <i>badauds</i> have lost their ability to be
startled. Paris, moreover, is not what it was.
The suavity and civility for which it was
proverbial have gone the way of other old-fashioned
virtues; the wit which used to run
about the streets never by any chance enters
a salon; save in China a more rapacious set
of bandits than the restauranteurs and shop-keepers
do not exist; the theatres are haunts
of ennui; the boulevards are filled with the
worst-dressed set of people in the world. As
for Parisian gaiety, there is nothing duller—no,
not even a carnival. In winter the city is<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_145">[145]</a></span>
a tomb; in summer a furnace. In fact, there
are dozens and dozens of places far more
attractive, but there is not one where house-keeping
is easier. The butcher and baker
are invisible providers of the best of fare.
The servants understand their duties and
attend to them, and, given a little forethought
and a good bank account, the palace
of the White Cat is there the most realizable
of constructions.</p>
<p>In a week’s time the house in the Parc
Monceau ran in grooves. To keep it running
the tenants had absolutely nothing to do but
to pay the bills. For this function Mr. Incoul
was amply prepared, and, that the establishment
should be on a proper footing, he
furnished an adjacent stable with carriages,
grooms and horse.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_146">[146]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XII">CHAPTER XII.</a><br/>
<small>MR. INCOUL IS PREOCCUPIED.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">Mr. Incoul’s attitude to his wife had,
meanwhile, in no wise altered. To an
observer, nay, to Maida herself, he was as
silent, methodical and self-abnegatory as
he had been from the first. He had indeed
caused her to send a regret to Ballister without
giving any reason why the regret should
be sent, but otherwise he showed himself very
indulgent.</p>
<p>He cared little for the stage, yet to gratify
Maida he engaged boxes for the season at
the Français and at the Opéra. Now and
then in the early autumn when summer was
still in the air he took her to dine in the
Bois, at Madrid or Armenenville, and drove
home with her in the cool of the evening,
stopping, perhaps, for a moment at some
one of the different concerts that lined the
Champs Elysées. And sometimes he went
with her to Versailles and at others to Vincennes,
and one Sunday to Bougival. But<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_147">[147]</a></span>
there Maida would never return; it was
crowded with a set of people the like of which
she had never seen before, with women whose
voices were high pitched and unmodulated,
and men in queer coats who stared at her
and smiled if they caught her eye.</p>
<p>But with the first tingle that accompanies
the falling leaves, the open-air restaurants
and concerts closed their doors. There was
a succession of new plays which Vitu always
praised and Sarcey always damned. The verdict
of the latter gentleman, however, did not
affect Maida in the least. She went bravely
to the Odéon and liked it, to the Cluny where
she saw a shocking play that made her laugh
till she cried. She went to the Nations and
saw Lacressonière and shuddered before
the art of that wonderful actor. At the Gymnase
she saw the “Maître des Forges” and
when she went home her eyes were wet; she
saw “Nitouche” and would have willingly
gone back the next night to see it again; even
Mr. Incoul smiled; nothing more irresistibly
amusing than Baron could be imagined; she
saw, too, Bartet and Delaunay, and for the
first time heard French well spoken. But of
all entertainments the Opéra pleasured her
most. Already, under Mapleson’s reign, she
had wearied of mere sweetness in music; she<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_148">[148]</a></span>
felt that she would enjoy Wagner and even
planned a pilgrimage to Bayreuth, but meanwhile
Meyerbeer had the power to intoxicate
her very soul. The septette in the second
act of “L’Africaine” affected her as had never
anything before; it vibrated from her fingertips
to the back of her neck; the entire score,
from the opening notes of the overture to
the farewell of Zuleika’s that fuses with
the murmur of the sea, thrilled her with
abrupt surprises, with series and excesses of
delight.</p>
<p>There were, of course, many evenings
when neither opera nor theatre was attractive,
and on such evenings invitations from resident
friends and acquaintances were sometimes
accepted and sometimes open house
was held.</p>
<p>On these occasions, Maida found herself
an envied bride. It was not merely that her
husband was rich enough to buy a principality
and hand it over for charitable purposes,
it was not merely that he was willing
to give her everything that feminine heart
could desire, it was that, however crowded
the halls might be, he seemed conscious of
the existence of but one woman, and that
woman was his wife. There were triflers
who said that this attitude was <i>bourgeois</i>;<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_149">[149]</a></span>
there were others—more witty—who said
that it was immoral; but, be this as it may,
the South American highwaymen, who called
themselves generals, the Russian princesses,
the Roumanian boyards, the attachés, embassadors,
and other accredited bores, the
contingent from the Faubourg, the American
residents, who, were they sent in a
body to the rack, could not have confessed
to an original thought among them, all these,
together with a sprinkling of Spaniards and
English, the Tout-Paris, in fact, agreed, as it
was intended they should, on this one point,
to wit, that Mr. Incoul was the most devoted
of husbands.</p>
<p>And such apparently he was. If Maida
had any lingering doubts as to the real reason
of their return to Paris, little by little
they faded. After her fright she made with
herself several little compacts, and that she
might carry them out the better she wrote to
Lenox a short, decisive note. She determined
that he should never enter her life
again. It was no longer his, he had let it go
without an effort to detain it, and in Biarritz
if it had seemed that he still held the key of
her heart, it was owing as much to the unexpectedness
of his presence as to the languors
of the afternoons. In marrying, she had<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_150">[150]</a></span>
meant to be brave; indeed, she had been so—when
there was no danger; and if in spite of
her intentions she had faltered, the faltering
had at least served as a lesson which she
would never need to learn again. Over the
cinders of her youth she would write a
Requiescat. Her girlhood had been her own
to give, but her womanhood she had pledged
to another.</p>
<p>As she thought of these things she wondered
at her husband. He had done what
she had hardly dared to expect—he had observed
their ante-nuptial agreement to the
letter. A brother could not have treated her
with greater respect. Surely if ever a man
set out to win his wife’s affection he had
chosen the surest way. And why had he so
acted if it were not as he had said, that given
time and opportunity he <i>would</i> win her affection.
He was doing so, Maida felt, and with
infinitely greater speed than she had ever
deemed possible. Beside, if the mangled
remnants of her heart seemed attractive, why
should he be debarred from their possession?
Yet, that was precisely the point; he did not
know of the mangled remnants, he thought
her heart-whole and virginal. But what
would he do if he learned the truth? And
as she wondered, suddenly the consciousness<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_151">[151]</a></span>
came to her that she was living with
a stranger.</p>
<p>Heretofore she had not puzzled over the
possible intricacies of her husband’s inner
nature. She had known that he was of a
grave and silent disposition, and as such she
had been content to accept him, without
question or query. But as she collected
some of the scattered threads and memories
of their life in common, it seemed to her that
latterly he had become even graver and more
silent than before. And this merely when
they were alone. In the presence of a third
person, when they went abroad as guests, or
when they remained at home as hosts, he put
his gravity aside like a garment. He encouraged
her in whatever conversation she
might have engaged in, he aided her with a
word or a suggestion, he made a point of
consulting her openly, and smiled approvingly
at any bright remark she chanced to
make.</p>
<p>But when they were alone, unless she personally
addressed him, he seldom spoke, and
the answers that he gave her, while perfectly
courteous in tone and couching, struck her,
now that she reflected, as automatic, like
phrases learned by rote. It is true they were
rarely alone. In the mornings he busied<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_152">[152]</a></span>
himself with his correspondence, and in the
afternoons she found herself fully occupied
with shops and visits, while in the evenings
there was usually a dinner, a play, or a reception,
sometimes all three. Since the season
had begun, it was only now and then, once in
ten days perhaps, that an evening was passed
<i>en tête-à-tête</i>. On such occasions he would
take up a book and read persistently, or he
would smoke, flicking the ashes from the
cigar abstractedly with his little finger, and
so sit motionless for hours, his eyes fixed on
the cornice.</p>
<p>It was this silence that puzzled her. It
was evident that he was thinking of something,
but of what? It could not be archæology,
he seemed to have given it up, and he
was not a metaphysician, the only thinker, be
it said, to whom silence is at all times permissible.</p>
<p>At first she feared that his preoccupation
might in some way be connected with the
episodes at Biarritz, but this fear faded. Mr.
Incoul had been made a member of the
Cercle des Capucines, and now and then
looked in there ostensibly to glance at the
papers or to take a hand at whist. One day
he said casually, “I saw your friend Leigh at
the club. You might ask him to dinner.”<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_153">[153]</a></span>
The invitation was sent, but Lenox had regretted.
After that incident it was impossible
for her to suppose that her husband’s
preoccupation was in anywise connected
with the intimacy which had subsisted between
the young man and herself.</p>
<p>There seemed left to her then but one tenable
supposition. Her husband had been
indulgence personified. He had been courteous,
refined and foreseeing, in fact a gentleman,
and, if silent, was it not possible that
the silence was due to a self-restraining delicacy,
to a feeling that did he speak he would
plead, and that, perhaps, when pleading would
be distasteful to her?</p>
<p>To this solution Maida inclined. It was
indeed the only one at which she could
arrive, and, moreover, it conveyed that little
bouquet of flattery which has been found
grateful by many far less young and feminine
than she. And so, one evening, for the
further elucidation of the enigma, and with
the idea that perhaps it needed but a word
from her to cause her husband to say something
of that which was on his mind, and
which she was at once longing and dreading
to hear—one evening when he had seemed
particularly abstracted, she bent forward and
said, “Harmon, of what are you thinking?”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_154">[154]</a></span></p>
<p>She had never called him by his given
name before. He started, and half turned.</p>
<p>“Of you,” he answered.</p>
<p>But Maida’s heart sank. She saw that his
eyes were not in hers, that they looked over
and beyond her, as though they followed the
fringes of an escaping dream.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_155">[155]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XIII">CHAPTER XIII.</a><br/>
<small>WHAT MAY BE HEARD IN A GREENROOM.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">One evening in November a new ballet
was given at the Opéra. Its production
had been heralded in the manner which
has found most favor with Parisian impressarii.
The dead walls of the capital were not
adorned with colored lithographs. The advertising
sheets held no notice of the coming
performance. But for several weeks previous
the columns of the liveliest journals had
teemed with items and discreet indiscretions.</p>
<p>Through these measures the curiosity of
the Tout-Paris had been coerced afresh, and,
when the curtain, after falling on the second
act of the “Favorite” parted again before the
new ballet, there was hardly a vacant seat in
the house.</p>
<p>The box which Mr. Incoul had taken for
the season was on what is known as the grand
tier. It was roomy, holding eight comfortably
and twelve if need be. But Maida, who was
adverse to anything that suggested crowding,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_156">[156]</a></span>
was always disinclined to ask more than five
or six to share it with her, and on the particular
evening to which allusion is made she
extended her hospitality to but four people:
Mr. and Mrs. Wainwaring and their daughter,
New Yorkers like herself, and the Duc de la
Dèche, a nobleman who served as figure-head
to the Cercle des Capucines, and who, so ran
the gossip, was anxious to effect an exchange
of his coroneted freedom for the possession
of Miss Wainwaring and a bundle or two of
her father’s securities.</p>
<p>During the <i>entr’acte</i> that preceded the
ballet the box was invaded by a number of
visitors, young men who were indebted to
Maida for a dinner or a cup of tea and by
others who hoped that such indebtedness
was still in store for them; there came, too,
a popular artist who wished to paint Maida’s
portrait for the coming Salon and an author
who may have had much cleverness, but who
never displayed it to any one.</p>
<p>As the invasion threatened to continue Mr.
Incoul went out in the corridor, where he was
presently joined by the duke, who suggested
that they should visit the foyer. They made
their way down the giant stair and turning
through the lobby passed on through the
corridor that circles the stalls until they<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_157">[157]</a></span>
reached a door guarded from non-subscribers
by a Suisse about whose neck there drooped
a medallioned chain of silver. By him the
door was opened wide and the two men
passed on through a forest of side scenes
till the <i>foyer de la danse</i> was reached.</p>
<p>It was a spacious apartment, well lighted
and lined with mirrors; the furniture was
meagre, a dozen or more chairs and lounges
of red plush. It was not beautiful, but then
what market ever is? To Mr. Incoul it was
brilliant as a café, and equally vulgar. From
dressing-rooms above and beyond there came
a stream of willowy girls. Few among them
were pretty, and some there were whose faces
were repulsive, but the majority were young;
some indeed, the rats, as they are called,
were mere children. Here and there was a
mother of the Mme. Cardinal type, armed
with an umbrella and prepared to listen to
offers. As a rule, however, the young ladies
of the ballet were quite able to attend to any
little matter of business without maternal
assistance. The Italian element was easily
distinguishable. There was the ultra darkness
of the eye, the faint umber of the skin,
the richer vitality, in fact, of which the anemic
daughters of Paris were unpossessed. And
now and then the Gothic gutturals of the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_158">[158]</a></span>
Spanish were heard, preceded by a wave of
garlic.</p>
<p>That night the subscribers to the stalls
were out in full force. There were Jew
bankers in plenty, there were detachments
from the Jockey and the Mirletons, one or
two foreign representatives, a few high functionaries,
the Minister of the Interior, and he
of the Fine Arts, a member of the imperial
family of Russia, a number of stock brokers
and an Arab Sheik flanked by an interpreter.</p>
<p>Before the curtain rose, battalions of ballerines
formed on the stage, and after the
performance began they were succeeded by
others, the first contingent returning to the
dressing-rooms or loitering in the foyer. In
this way there was a constant coming and
going accompanied by the murmur of the
spectators beyond and the upper notes of
the flute.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul was growing weary; he would
have returned to the box, but he was joined
by acquaintances that he had made at the
club, Frenchmen mainly, friends of his companion,
and presently he found himself surrounded
by a group of <i>viveurs</i>, men about
town, who had their Paris at the end of their
gloves, and to whom it held no secrets.
They had dined and talked animatedly in<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_159">[159]</a></span>
ends and remnants of phrases in a sort of
verbal telegraphy; an exclamation helped by
a gesture sufficing as often as not for the
full conveyance of their thought.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul spoke French with tolerable
ease, but having nothing of moment to say,
he held his tongue, contenting himself with
listening to the words of those who stood
about him. And as he listened, the name of
Mirette caught his ear. The programme
had already informed him that it was she who
was to assume the principal rôle in the new
ballet, consequently he was not unfamiliar
with it, but of the woman herself he knew
nothing, and he listened idly, indifferent to
ampler information. But at once his interest
quickened; his immediate neighbor had mentioned
her in connection with one whom he
knew.</p>
<p>“They came up from Biarritz together,” he
heard him say. “She went there with Chose,
that Russian.”</p>
<p>“Balaguine?”</p>
<p>“Precisely.”</p>
<p>“What did she do with him?”</p>
<p>“Found the Tartar, I fancy.”</p>
<p>“And then?”</p>
<p>“<i>Voilà</i>, this young American is mad about
her.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_160">[160]</a></span></p>
<p>“He is rich then?”</p>
<p>“What would you? An American! They
are it all.”</p>
<p>“Yes, a rich one always wins.”</p>
<p>“How mean you?”</p>
<p>“This: he plays bac at the Capucines. His
banks are fructuous.”</p>
<p>“Ah, as to that—” And the first speaker
shrugged his shoulders.</p>
<p>A rustle circled through the foyer, men
stood aside and nodded affably. The lights
took on a fairer glow. “Stay,” murmured
the second speaker, “she is there.”</p>
<p>Through the parting crowd Mirette passed
with a carriage such as no queen, save perhaps
Semiramis, ever possessed. She moved
from the hips, her body was erect and unswayed.
It was the perfection of artificial
grace. Her features were not regular, but
there was an expression in them that stirred
the pulse. “<i>Je suis l’Amour</i>,” she seemed to
say, and to add “<i>prends garde à toi</i>.” As she
crossed the room men moistened their lips,
and when she had gone they found them still
parched.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul followed her with his eyes.
She had not left him unimpressed, but his
impression differed from that of his neighbors.
In her face his shrewdness had discerned<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_161">[161]</a></span>
nothing but the animal and the greed
of unsatiated appetites. He watched her
pass, and stepped from the group in which
he had been standing that he might the better
follow her movements.</p>
<p>From the foyer she floated on into a side
scene, yet not near enough to the stage to
be seen by the audience. A few machinists
moved aside to let her pass, and as they
did so Mr. Incoul saw Lenox Leigh. It was
evident that he had been waiting there for
her coming. There was a scarf about her
neck, and as the young man turned to greet
her, she took it off and gave it into his keeping.
They whispered together. Beyond,
Mr. Incoul could see the tulle of the ballet
rising and subsiding to the rhythm of the
orchestra. Then came a sudden blare of
trumpets, the measure swooned, and as it
recovered again the ballet had faded to the
back of the stage. Abruptly, as though
sprung from a trap-door, a <i>régisseur</i> appeared,
and at a signal from him Mirette, with one
quick backward stroke to her skirt, bounded
from the side scene and fluttered down to
the footlights amid a crash and thunder of
applause.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul had heard and seen enough.
His mind was busy. He felt the need of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_162">[162]</a></span>
fresh air and of solitude. He turned into
the corridor and from there went through
the vestibule until he reached an outer door,
which he swung open and passed out into the
night. He was thinly clad, in evening dress,
and the air was chilly, but he thought nothing
of his dress nor of the warmth or chill of
the air. He walked up and down before the
building with his head bent and his hands
behind his back. A <i>camelot</i> offered him a
pack of transparent cards, a vender of programmes
pestered him to buy, but he passed
them unheeding. For fully half an hour he
continued his walk, and when he re-entered
the box, Maida, who of late had given much
attention to his moods, noticed that his face
was flushed, and that about his lips there
played the phantom of a smile.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_163">[163]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XIV">CHAPTER XIV.</a><br/>
<small>KARL GROWS A MOUSTACHE.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">For several days Mr. Incoul was much
occupied. He left the house early and
returned to it late. One afternoon he sent
for Karl. Since the return to Paris the courier’s
duties had not been arduous; they consisted
chiefly in keeping out of the way. On
this particular afternoon he was not immediately
discoverable, and when at last he presented
himself it was in the expectation that
the hour of his dismissal had struck. He
bowed, nevertheless, with the best grace in
the world, and noticing that his employer’s
eyes were upon him, gazed deferentially at
the carpet.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul looked at him in a contemplative
way for a moment or two. “Karl,” he
said at last, and Karl raised his eyes.</p>
<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
<p>“Have you any objections to shaving your
whiskers?”</p>
<p>“I, sir? not the slightest.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_164">[164]</a></span></p>
<p>“I will be obliged if you will do so. This
afternoon you might go to Cumberland’s and
be measured. I have left orders there. Then
take a room at the Meurice; you have money,
have you not? Very good, keep an account
of your expenditures. In a week I will send
you my instructions. That will do for to-day.”</p>
<p>An hour later Mr. Incoul was watching a
game of baccarat at the Cercle des Capucines.</p>
<p>Meanwhile Lenox Leigh had given much
of his time to the pleasures of Mirette’s
society. In making her acquaintance at Biarritz
he had been actuated partly by the idleness
of the moment and partly by the attracting
face of celebrity. He had never known
a danseuse; indeed, heretofore, his acquaintance
with women had been limited to those
of his own <i>monde</i>, and during the succeeding
days he hovered about her more that he might
add a new photograph to a mental album than
with any idea of conquest. She amused him
extremely. In her speech she displayed a
recklessness of adjective such as he had never
witnessed before. It was not that she was
brilliant, but she possessed that stereotyped
form of repartee which is known as <i>bagou</i>,
and which the Parisian takes to naturally and<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_165">[165]</a></span>
without effort. Mirette seemed to have acquired
it in its supremest expression. One
day, for instance, the curiosity of her circle
of admirers was aroused by a young actress
who, while painfully plain, squandered coin
with remarkable ease. “Whom do you suppose
she gets the money from?” some one
asked, and Mirette without so much as drawing
breath answered serenely, “A blind
man.” In spite of the <i>bagou</i> Mirette was not
a Parisian. She was born in the provinces,
at Orléans, and was wont to declare herself a
lineal descendant of Joan of Arc. She lied
with perfect composure; if reproached she
curled her lips. “Lies whiten the teeth,”
she would say, an argument which it was impossible
to refute.</p>
<p>Under the empire she would have been a
success; under a republic she complained of
the difficulty of making two ends meet.
Now Lenox was not rich, but he was an
American, and the Americans have assumed
in Paris the position which the English once
held. Their coffers are considered inexhaustible.
On this subject, thanks to Mrs.
Mackay, Mr. Incoul, the Vanderbilts, the
Astors and a dozen others, there is now no
doubt in the mind of the French. To be an
American is to be a Vesuvius of gold pieces.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_166">[166]</a></span></p>
<p>As a native of the land of millions, Lenox
found that his earliest attentions were received
with smiles, and in time when a Russian
became so scratched that the Tartar was
visible, Mirette welcomed him with undisguised
favor.</p>
<p>Like many another, Lenox had his small
vanities; he would have liked to have thought
himself indispensable to Maida’s happiness,
but in her absence he did not object to being
regarded as the <i>cavaliere servente</i> of the first
lady of the ballet. Between the two women
the contrast was striking. Mirette, as has
been hinted, was reckless of adjective; she
was animal, imperious, and at times frankly
vulgar. Maida was her antithesis. She
shrank from coarseness as from a deformity.
Both represented Love, but they represented
the extremes. One was as ignorant of virtue
as the other was unconscious of vice. One
was Mylitta, the other Psyche. Had the difference
been less accentuated, it would have
jarred. But the transition was immeasurable.
It was like a journey from the fjords of Norway
to the jungles of Hindustan. That
Psyche was regretted goes without the need
of telling, but Mylitta has enchantments
which are said to lull regret.</p>
<p>In the second week of October the bathing<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_167">[167]</a></span>
was still delicious. The waves encircled one
in a large, abrupt embrace. Mirette would
have liked to remain, the beach was a daily
triumph for her. There was not a woman in
the world who could have held herself in the
scantiest of costumes, under the fire of a
thousand eyes, as gracefully as she. No
sedan-chair for her indeed. No hurrying,
no running, no enveloping wrap. No pretense
or attempt to avoid the scrutiny of the
bystanders. There was nothing of this for
her. She crossed the entire width of sand,
calmly, slowly, an invitation on her lips and
with the walk and majesty of a queen. The
amateurs as usual were tempted to applaud.
It was indeed a triumph, an advertisement to
boot, and one which she would have liked to
prolong. But she was needed at the Opéra
and so she returned to Paris accompanied by
Lenox Leigh.</p>
<p>In Paris it is considered inconvenient for a
pretty woman to go about on foot, and as for
cabs, where is the self-respecting chorus-girl
who would consent to be seen in one?
Mirette was very positive on this point and
Lenox agreed with her thoroughly. He did
not, however, for that reason offer to provide
an equipage. Indeed the wherewithal was
lacking. He had spent more money at<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_168">[168]</a></span>
Biarritz than he had intended, perhaps ten
times the amount that he would have spent
at Newport or at Cowes, and his funds were
nearly exhausted.</p>
<p>As every one is aware a banker is the
last person in the world to be consulted on
matters of finance. If a client has money in
his pocket a banker can transfer it to his own
in an absolutely painless manner, but if the
client’s pocket is empty what banker, out of
an opéra-bouffe, was ever willing to fill it?
Lenox reflected over this and was at a loss
how to act. The firm on whom his drafts
were drawn held nothing on their ledgers to
his credit. He visited them immediately on
arriving and was given a letter which for
the moment he fancied might contain a remittance.
But it bore the Paris postmark
and the address was in Maida’s familiar
hand. As he looked at it he forgot his indigence,
his heart gave an exultant throb. He
had promised himself that when he met her
again matters should go on very much as
they had before, and he had further promised
himself that so soon as his former footing
was re-established he would give up Mirette.
He was therefore well pleased when the note
was placed in his hands. It had a faint odor
of orris, and he opened it as were he unfolding<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_169">[169]</a></span>
a lace handkerchief. But from what has
gone before it will be understood that his
pleasure was short lived. The note was
brief and categoric, he read it almost at a
glance, and when he had possessed himself
of the contents he felt that the determination
conveyed was one from which there was no
appeal, or rather one from which any appeal
would be useless. He looked at the note
again. The handwriting suggested an unaccustomed
strength, and in the straight, firm
strokes he read the irrevocable. “It is done,”
he muttered. “I can write Finis over that.”
He looked again at the note and then tore it
slowly into minute scraps, and watched them
flutter from him.</p>
<p>He went out to the street and there his
earlier preoccupation returned. It would
be a month at least before a draft could be
sent, and meanwhile, though he had enough
for his personal needs, he had nothing with
which to satisfy Mirette’s caprices. <i>Et elle
en avait, cette dame!</i> The thought of separating
from her did not occur to him, or if it did
it was in that hazy indistinguishable form in
which eventualities sometimes visit the perplexed.
If Maida’s note had been other, he
would have washed his hands of Mirette, but
now apparently she was the one person on the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_170">[170]</a></span>
Continent who cared when he came and when
he went. In his present position he was like
one who, having sprained an ankle, learns the
utility of a crutch. The idea of losing it was
not agreeable. Beside, the knowledge that
his intimacy with the woman had been envied
by grandees with unnumbered hats was
to him a source of something that resembled
consolation.</p>
<p>Presently he reached the boulevard. He
was undecided what to do or where to turn,
and as he loitered on the curb the silver head
of a stick was waved at him from a passing
cab; in a moment the vehicle stopped. May
alighted and shook him by the hand.</p>
<p>“I am on my way to the Capucines,” he
explained, in his blithesome stutter. “There’s
a big game on; why not come, too?”</p>
<p>“A big game of what?”</p>
<p>“B-b, why baccarat of course. What did
you suppose? M-marbles?”</p>
<p>Lenox fumbled in his waistcoat pocket.
“Yes, I’ll go,” he said.</p>
<p>Five minutes later he was standing in a
crowded room before a green table. He had
never gambled, and hardly knew one card
from another, but baccarat can be learned
with such facility that after two deals a raw
recruit can argue with a veteran as to whether<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_171">[171]</a></span>
it is better to stand on five or to draw. Lenox
watched the flight of notes, gold and counters.
He listened to the monotonous calls: <i>J’en
donne! Carte! Neuf!</i> The end of the
table at which he stood seemed to be unlucky.
He moved to the other, and presently
he leaned over the shoulder of a gamester
and put down a few louis. In an hour he
left the room with twenty-seven thousand
francs.</p>
<p>A fraction of it he put in his card-case, the
rest he handed to Mirette. It was not a large
sum, but its dimensions were satisfactory to
her. “<i>Ce p’tit chat</i>,” she said to herself, “<i>je
savais bien qu’il ne ferait pas le lapin</i>.” And
of the large azure notes she made precisely
one bite.</p>
<p>Thereafter for some weeks things went on
smoothly enough. Mirette’s mornings were
passed at rehearsals, but usually the afternoons
were free, and late in the day she
would take Lenox to the Cascade, or meet
him there and drive back with him to dinner.
In the evenings there was the inevitable
theatre, with supper afterwards at some <i>cabaret
à la mode</i>. And sometimes when she
was over-fatigued, Lenox would go to the
club and try a hand at baccarat.</p>
<p>He was not always so fortunate as on the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_172">[172]</a></span>
first day, but on the whole his good luck was
noticeable. It is possible, however, that he
found the excitement enervating. He had
been used to a much quieter existence, one
that if not entirely praiseworthy was still
outwardly decorous, and suddenly he had
been pitch-forked into that narrowest of circles
which is called Parisian life. He may
have liked it at first, as one is apt to like any
novelty, but to nerves that are properly attuned
a little of its viciousness goes a very
great way.</p>
<p>It may be that it was beginning to exert its
usual dissolvent effect. In any event Lenox,
who all his life had preferred water to wine,
found absinthe grateful in the morning.</p>
<p>One afternoon, shortly after the initial performance
of the new ballet, he went from his
hotel to the apartment which Mirette occupied
in the Rue Pierre-Charon. He was informed
that she was not at home. He questioned
the servant as to her whereabouts, but
the answers he received were vague and
unsatisfactory. He then drove to the Cascade,
but Mirette did not appear. After
dinner he made sure of finding her. In this
expectation he was again disappointed.</p>
<p>The next day his success was no better.
He questioned the servant uselessly. “Madame<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_173">[173]</a></span>
was not at home, she had left no word.”
To each of his questions the answer was invariable.
It was evident that the servant
had been coached, and it was equally evident
that at least for the moment his companionship
was not a prime necessity to the first
lady of the ballet.</p>
<p>As he left the house he bit his lip. That
Mirette should be capricious was quite in the
order of things, but that she should treat him
like the first comer was a different matter.
When he had last seen her, her manner had
left nothing to be desired, and suddenly,
without so much as a p. p. c., her door was
shut, and not shut as it might have been by
accident; no, it was persistently, purposely
closed.</p>
<p>Presently he reached the Champs-Elysées.
It was Sunday. A stream of carriages
flooded the avenue, and the sidewalks were
thronged with ill-dressed people. The crowd
increased his annoyance. The possibility of
being jostled irritated him, the spectacle of
dawdling shop-keepers filled him with disgust.
He hailed a cab in which to escape;
the driver paid no attention; he hailed
another; the result was the same, and then in
the increasing exasperation of the moment
he felt that he hated Paris. A fat man with<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_174">[174]</a></span>
pursed lips and an air of imbecile self-satisfaction
brushed against him. He could have
turned and slapped him in the face.</p>
<p>Without, however, committing any overt
act of violence, he succeeded in reaching his
hotel. There he sought the reading-room,
but he found it fully occupied by one middle-aged
Englishwoman, and leaving her in undisturbed
possession of the <i>Times</i>, he went to
his own apartment. A day or two before he
had purchased a copy of a much applauded
novel, and from it he endeavored to extract
a sedative. Mechanically he turned the
pages. His eyes glanced over and down
them, resting at times through fractions of
an hour on a single line, but the words conveyed
no message to his mind, his thoughts
were elsewhere, they surged through vague
perplexities and hovered over shadowy enigmas,
until at last he discovered that he was
trying to read in the dark.</p>
<p>He struck a light and found that it was
nearly seven. “I will dress,” he told himself,
“and dine at the club.” In half an hour he
was on his way to the Capucines. The streets
were still crowded and the Avenue de
l’Opéra in which his hotel was situated,
vibrated as were it the main artery of the
capital. As he approached the boulevard he<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_175">[175]</a></span>
thought that it would perhaps be wiser to
dine at a restaurant; he was discomfited and
he was not sure but that the myriad tongue
of gossip might not be already busy with the
cause of his discomfiture. He did not feel
talkative, and were he taciturn at the club he
knew that it would be remarked. Bignon’s
was close at hand. Why not dine there? In
his indecision he halted before an adjacent
shop and stood for a moment looking in the
window, apparently engrossed by an assortment
of strass and imitation pearls. The
proprietress was lounging in the doorway.
“<i>Si Monsieur veut entrer</i>”—she began seductively,
but he turned from her; as he
did so, a brougham drew up before the curb
and Mirette stepped from it.</p>
<p>Lenox, in his surprise at the unexpected,
did not at first notice that a man had also
alighted. He moved forward and would have
spoken, but Mirette looked him straight in
the eyes, as who should say <i>Allez vous faire
lanlaire, mon cher</i>, and passed on into the
restaurant.</p>
<p>Her companion had hurried a little in advance
to open the door, and as he swung it
aside and Mirette entered Lenox caught a
glimpse of his face. It was meaningless
enough, and yet not entirely unfamiliar.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_176">[176]</a></span>
“Who is the cad,” he wondered. Yet, after
all, what difference did it make? He could
not blame the man. As for jealousy, the
word was meaningless to him. It was his
<i>amour propre</i> that suffered. He smiled a
trifle grimly to himself and continued his
way.</p>
<p>At the corner was a large picture shop.
An old man wrapped in a loose fur coat
stood at the window looking at the painting
of a little girl. The child was alone in a
coppice and seemingly much frightened at
the approach of a flock of does. Unconsciously
Lenox stopped also. He had been
so bewildered by the suddenness of the cut
that he did not notice whether he was
walking or standing still.</p>
<p>And so it was for this, he mused, that
admittance had been denied him. But why
could she not have had the decency to tell
him not to come instead of letting him run
there like a tradesman with a small bill?
Certainly he had deserved better things of
her than that. It was so easy for a woman
to break gracefully. A note, a word, and if
the man insists a second note, a second word;
after that the man, if he is decently bred, can
do nothing but raise his hat and speed the
parting guest. Beside, why would she want<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_177">[177]</a></span>
to break with him and take up with a fellow
who looked like a barber from the Grand
Hôtel? Who was he any way?</p>
<p>His eyes rested on the picture of the little
girl. The representation of her childish
fright almost diverted his thoughts, but all
the while there was an undercurrent which in
some dim way kept telling him that he had
seen the man’s face before. And as he
groped in his memory the picture of the
child faded as might a picture in a magic
lantern, and in its place, vaguely at first and
gradually better defined, he saw, standing in
the moonlight, on a white road, a coach and
four. To the rear was the terrace of a
hôtel, and beyond was a shimmering bay like
to that which he had seen at San Sebastian.</p>
<p>“My God,” he cried aloud, “it’s Incoul’s
courier!”</p>
<p>The old man in the fur coat looked at him
nervously, and shrank away.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_178">[178]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XV">CHAPTER XV.</a><br/>
<small>MAY EXPOSTULATES.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">That evening the Wainwarings and the
Blydenburgs dined at the house in the
Parc Monceau. The Blydenburgs had long
since deserted Biarritz, but the return journey
had been broken at Luchon, and in that
resort the days had passed them by like
chapters in a stupid fairy tale.</p>
<p>They were now on their way home; the
pleasures of the Continent had begun to pall,
and during the dinner, Mr. Blydenburg took
occasion to express his opinion on the superiority
of American institutions over those of
all other lands, an opinion to which he lent
additional weight by repeating from time to
time that New York was quite good enough
for him.</p>
<p>There were no other guests. Shortly before
ten the Wainwarings left, and as Blydenburg
was preparing to take his daughter back
to the hotel, Mr. Incoul said that he would
be on the boulevard later, and did he care to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_179">[179]</a></span>
have him he would take him to the club, a
proposition to which Blydenburg at once
agreed.</p>
<p>“Harmon,” said Maida, when they were
alone, “are you to be away long?”</p>
<p>During dinner she had said but little.
Latterly she had complained of sleeplessness,
and to banish the insomnia a physician had
recommended the usual bromide of potassium.
As she spoke, Mr. Incoul noticed that
she was pale.</p>
<p>“Possibly not,” he answered.</p>
<p>She had been standing before the hearth,
her bare arm resting on the velvet of the
mantel, and her eyes following the flicker of
the burning logs—but now she turned to him.</p>
<p>“Do you remember our pact?” she asked.</p>
<p>He looked at her but said nothing. She
moved across the room to where he stood;
one hand just touched his sleeve, the other
she raised to his shoulder and rested it there
for a second’s space. Her eyes sought his
own, her head was thrown back a little, from
her hair came the perfume of distant oases,
her lips were moist and her neck was like a
jasmine.</p>
<p>“Harmon,” she continued in a tone as low
as were she speaking to herself, “we have
come into our own.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_180">[180]</a></span></p>
<p>And then the caress passed from his sleeve,
her hand fell from his shoulder, she glided
from him with the motion of a swan.</p>
<p>“Come to me when you return,” she
added. Her face had lost its pallor, it was
flushed, but her voice was brave.</p>
<p>Yet soon, when the door closed behind him,
her courage faltered. In the eyes of him
whose name she bore and to whom for the
first time she had made offer of her love, she
had seen no answering affection—merely a
look which a man might give who wins a long-contested
game of chess. But presently she
reassured herself. If at the avowal her husband
had seemed triumphant, in very truth
what was he else? She turned to a mirror
that separated the windows and gazed at her
own reflection. Perhaps he did think the
winning a triumph. Many another would
have thought so, too. She was entirely in
white; her arms and neck were unjeweled.
“I look like a bride,” she told herself, and
then, with the helplessness of regret, she
remembered that brides wear orange blossoms,
but she had none.</p>
<p>The idler in Paris is apt to find Sunday
evenings dull. There are many houses open,
it is true, but not infrequently the idler is disinclined
to receptions, and as to the theatres,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_181">[181]</a></span>
it is <i>bourgeois</i> to visit them. There is, therefore,
little left save the clubs, and on this
particular Sunday evening, when Mr. Incoul
and Blydenburg entered the Capucines, they
found it tolerably filled.</p>
<p>A lackey in silk knee breeches and livery of
pale blue came to take their coats. It was
not, however, until Blydenburg had been
helped off with his that he noticed that Mr.
Incoul had preferred to keep his own on.</p>
<p>The two men then passed out of the vestibule
into a room in which was a large table
littered with papers, and from there into
another room where a man whom Mr. Incoul
recognized as De la Dèche was dozing on a
lounge, and finally a room was reached in
which most of the members had assembled.</p>
<p>“It reminds me of a hotel,” said Blydenburg.</p>
<p>“It is,” his friend answered shortly. He
seemed preoccupied as were he looking for
some one or something; and presently, as
they approached a green table about which a
crowd was grouped, Blydenburg pulled him
by the sleeve.</p>
<p>“That’s young Leigh dealing,” he exclaimed.</p>
<p>To this Mr. Incoul made no reply. He put
his hand in a lower outside pocket of his<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_182">[182]</a></span>
overcoat and assured himself that a little
package which he had placed there had not
become disarranged.</p>
<p>On hearing his name, Lenox looked up
from his task. A Frenchman who had just
entered the room nodded affably to him and
asked if he were lucky that evening.</p>
<p>“Lucky!” cried some one who had caught
the question, “I should say so. His luck is
something insolent; he struck a match a
moment ago and <i>it lit</i>.”</p>
<p>The whole room roared. French matches
are like French cigars in this, there is nothing
viler. It is just possible that the parental
republic has views of its own as to the injuriousness
of smoking, and seeks to discourage
it as it would a vice. But this is as it may
be. Every one laughed and Lenox with the
others. Mr. Incoul caught his eye and bowed
to him across the table. Blydenburg had
already smiled and bowed in the friendliest
way. He did not quite care to see Mrs.
Manhattan’s brother dealing at baccarat, but
after all, when one is at Rome—</p>
<p>“Do you care to play?” Mr. Incoul asked.</p>
<p>“Humph! I might go a louis or two for a
flyer.”</p>
<p>They had both been standing behind the
croupier, but Mr. Incoul then left his companion,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_183">[183]</a></span>
and passing around the table stopped
at a chair which was directly on Lenox’s left.
In this chair a man was seated, and before
him was a small pile of gold. As the cards
were dealt the gold diminished, and when it
dwindled utterly and at last disappeared, the
man rose from his seat and Mr. Incoul
dropped in it.</p>
<p>From the overcoat pocket, in which he had
previously felt, he drew out a number of
thousand-franc notes; they were all unfolded,
and under them was a little package. The
notes, with the package beneath them, were
placed by Mr. Incoul where the pile of gold
had stood. One of the notes he then threw out
in the semicircle. A man seated next to him
received the cards which Lenox dealt.</p>
<p>“I give,” Lenox called in French.</p>
<p>“Card,” the man answered.</p>
<p>It was a face card that he received.</p>
<p>“Six,” Lenox announced.</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul’s neighbor could boast of
nothing. The next cards that were dealt on
that end of the table went to a man beyond.
Mr. Incoul knew that did that man not hold
higher cards than the banker the cards in
the succeeding deal would come to him.</p>
<p>He took a handful of notes and reached
them awkwardly enough across the space<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_184">[184]</a></span>
from which Lenox dealt; for one second his
hand rested on the talion, then he said, “<i>À
cheval.</i>” Which, being interpreted, means
half on one side and half on the other. The
croupier took the notes, and placed them in
the proper position. “Nine,” Lenox called;
he had won at both ends of the table.</p>
<p>The croupier drew in the stakes with his
rake. “Gentlemen,” he droned, “make your
game.”</p>
<p>Mr. Incoul pushed out five thousand francs.
The next cards on the left were dealt to him.</p>
<p>“Nine,” Lenox called again.</p>
<p>And then a very singular thing happened.
The croupier leaned forward to draw in Mr.
Incoul’s money, but just as the rake touched
the notes, Mr. Incoul drew them away.</p>
<p>“<i>Monsieur!</i>” exclaimed the croupier.</p>
<p>The eyes of every one were upon him.
He pushed his chair back, and stood up,
holding in his hand the two cards which had
been dealt him, then throwing them down on
the table, he said very quietly, but in a voice
that was perfectly distinct, “These cards are
marked.”</p>
<p>A moment before the silence had indeed
been great, but during the moment that followed
Mr. Incoul’s announcement, it was so
intensified that it could be felt. Then<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_185">[185]</a></span>
abruptly words leapt from the mouths of the
players and bystanders. The croupier turned,
protesting his innocence of any complicity.
There may have been some who listened, but
if there were any such, they were few; the
entire room was sonorous with loud voices;
the hubbub was so great that it woke De la
Dèche; he came in at one door rubbing his
eyes; at another a crowd of lackeys, startled
at the uproar, had suddenly assembled. And
by the chair which he had pushed from him
and which had fallen backwards to the ground,
Mr. Incoul stood, motionless, looking down at
Lenox Leigh.</p>
<p>In the abruptness of the accusation Lenox
had not immediately understood that it was
directed against him, but when he looked
into the inimical faces that fronted and surrounded
him, when he heard the anger of the
voices, when he saw hands stretched for the
cards which he dealt, and impatient eyes
examining their texture, and when at last,
though the entire scene was compassed in the
fraction of a minute, when he heard an epithet
and saw that he was regarded as a
Greek, he knew that the worst that could be
had been done.</p>
<p>He turned, still sitting, and looked his accuser
in the face, and in it he read a message<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_186">[186]</a></span>
which to all of those present was to him
alone intelligible. He bowed his head. In
a vision like to that which is said to visit
the last moments of a drowning man, he saw
it all: the reason of Maida’s unexplained
departure, the coupling of Mirette with a servant,
and this supreme reproach made credible
by the commonest of tricks, the application
of a cataplasm, a new deck of cards on
those already in use. It was vengeance indeed.</p>
<p>He sprang from his seat. He was a handsome
fellow and the pallor of his face made
his dark hair seem darker and his dark eyes
more brilliant. “It is a plot,” he cried. He
might as well have asked alms of statues.
The cards had been examined, the <i>maquillage</i>
was evident. “Put him out!” a hundred
voices were shouting; “<i>à la porte!</i>”</p>
<p>Suddenly the shouting subsided and ceased.
Lenox craned his neck to discover who his
possible defender might be, and caught a
glimpse of De la Dèche, brushing with one
finger some ashes from his coat sleeve, and
looking about him with an indolent, deprecatory
air.</p>
<p>“Gentlemen,” he heard him say, “the
committee will act in the matter; meanwhile,
for the honor of the club, I beg you will not
increase the scandal.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_187">[187]</a></span></p>
<p>He turned to Lenox and said, with perfect
courtesy, “Sir, do me the favor to step this
way.”</p>
<p>Through the parting crowd Lenox followed
the duke. In crossing the room he looked
about him. On his way he passed the
Frenchman who had addressed him five minutes
before. The man turned aside. He
passed other acquaintances. They all seemed
suddenly smitten by the disease known as <i>Noli
me tangere</i>. In the doorway was May. Of him
he felt almost sure, but the brute drew back.
“Really,” he said, “I must exp-postulate.”</p>
<p>“Expostulate and be damned,” Lenox
gnashed at him. “I am as innocent as you are.”</p>
<p>In an outer room, where he presently
found himself, De La Dèche stood lighting a
cigar; that difficult operation terminated, he
said, slowly, with that rise and fall of the
voice which is peculiar to the Parisian when
he wishes to appear impressive:</p>
<p>“You had better go now, and if you will
permit me to offer you a bit of advice, I
would recommend you to send a resignation
to any clubs of which you may happen to be
a member.”</p>
<p>He touched a bell; a lackey appeared.</p>
<p>“Maxime, get this gentleman’s coat and
see him to the door.”</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_188">[188]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XVI">CHAPTER XVI.</a><br/>
<small>THE BARE BODKIN.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">Presently Lenox found himself on
the boulevard. There was a café near
at hand, and he sat down at one of the
tables that lined the sidewalk. He was
dazed as were he in the semi-consciousness
of somnambulism. He gave an order absently,
and when some drink was placed before
him, he took it at a gulp.</p>
<p>Under its influence his stupor fell from
him. The necessity, the obligation of proving
his innocence presented itself, but, with
it, hand in hand, came the knowledge that
such proof was impossible. Even his luck at
play would be taken as corroboratory of the
charge. Were he to say that the marked
cards had been placed on the talion by Incoul,
who was there outside the aisles of the
insane that would listen to such a defense?
To compel attention, he would be obliged to
explain the act, and state its reason. And
that explanation he could never give. He<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_189">[189]</a></span>
could not exculpate himself at the cost of a
woman’s fame. Which ever way he turned,
dishonor stood before him. The toils into
which he had fallen had been woven with a
cunning so devilish in its clairvoyance that
every avenue of escape was closed. He was
blockaded in his own disgrace.</p>
<p>He rested his head in his hand, and
moaned aloud. Presently, with the instinct
of a hunted beast, he felt that people were
looking at him. He feared that some of his
former acquaintances, on leaving the club,
had passed and seen him sitting there, and
among them, perhaps Incoul.</p>
<p>He threw some money in the saucer and
hurried away. There were still many people
about. To avoid them he turned into a side
street and walked on with rapid step. Soon
he was in the Rue de la Paix. It was practically
deserted. On a corner, a young ruffian
in a slouch hat was humming, “<i>Ugène,
tu m’fais languir</i>,” and beating time to the
measure with his foot. Just above the
Colonne Vendôme the moon rested like a
vagrant, weary of its amble across the sky.
But otherwise the street was solitary.
Through its entire length but one shop was
open, and as Lenox approached it a man
came out to arrange the shutters. From the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_190">[190]</a></span>
doorway a thin stream of light still filtered on
the pavement. In the window were globes
filled with colored liquids, and beyond at a
counter a clerk was tying a parcel.</p>
<p>Lenox entered. “Give me a Privas,” he
said, and when the clerk had done so, he
asked him to make up a certain prescription.
But to this the man objected; he could not,
he explained, without a physician’s order.</p>
<p>“Here are several,” said Lenox, and he
took from his card-case a roll of azure notes.</p>
<p>The clerk eyed them nervously. They
represented over a year’s salary. He hesitated
a moment, “I don’t know,”—and he
shook his head, as were he arguing with
himself—“I don’t know whether I am doing
right.” And at once prepared the mixture.</p>
<p>Ten minutes later Lenox was mounting
the stair of the hotel at which he lodged.
On reaching his room he put his purchases
on a table, poured out a glass of absinthe,
lit a cigarette, and threw himself down on a
lounge. For a while his thoughts roamed
among the episodes of the day, but gradually
they drifted into less personal currents. He
began to think of the early legends: of
Chiron, the god, renouncing his immortality;
of the Hyperboreans, that fabled people,
famous for their felicity, who voluntarily<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_191">[191]</a></span>
threw themselves into the sea; of Juno
bringing death to Biton and Cleobis as the
highest recompense of their piety; of Agamedes
and Trophonius, praying Apollo for
whatever gift he deemed most advantageous,
and in answer to the prayer receiving eternal
sleep.</p>
<p>He reflected on the meaning of these legends,
and, as he reflected, he remembered
that the Thracians greeted birth with lamentations
and death with welcoming festivals.
He thought of that sage who pitied the
gods because their lives were unending, and
of Menander singing the early demise of the
favored. He remembered how Plato had
preached to the happiest people in the world
the blessedness of ceaseless sleep; how the
Buddha, teaching that life was but a right to
suffer, had found for the recalcitrant no
greater menace than that of an existence renewed
through kalpas of time. Then he
bethought him of the promise of that peace
which passeth all understanding, and which
the grave alone fulfills, and he repeated to
himself Christ’s significant threat, “In this
life ye shall have tribulation.”</p>
<p>And, as these things came to him, so, too,
did the problem of pain. He reviewed the
ravages of that ulcer which has battened on<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_192">[192]</a></span>
humanity since the world began. History
uncoiled itself before him in a shudder. In
its spasms he saw the myriads that have
fought and died for dogmas that they did
not understand, for invented principles of
patriotism and religion, for leaders that they
had never seen, for gods more helpless than
themselves.</p>
<p>He saw, too, Nature’s cruelty and her
snares. The gift to man of appetites, which,
in the guise of pleasure, veil immedicable
pain. Poison in the richest flowers, the
agony that lurks in the grape. He knew
that whoso ate to his hunger, or drank to his
thirst, summoned to him one or more of
countless maladies—maladies which parents
gave with their vices to their children, who,
in turn, bring forth new generations that are
smitten with all the ills to which flesh is heir.
And he knew that even those who lived most
temperately were defenceless from disorders
that come unawares and frighten away one’s
nearest friends. While for those who escaped
miasmas and microbes; for those who asked
pleasure, not of the flesh, but of the mind;
for those whose days are passed in study,
who seek to learn some rhyme for the reason
of things, who try to gratify the curiosity
which Nature has given them; for such as<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_193">[193]</a></span>
they, he remembered, there is blindness,
paralysis, and the asylums of the insane.</p>
<p>He thought of the illusions, of love, hope
and ambition, illusions which make life seem
a pleasant thing worth living, and which, in
cheating man into a continuance of his right
to suffer, make him think pain an accident
and not the rule.</p>
<p>“Surely,” he mused, “the idiot alone is
content. He at least has no illusions; he
expects nothing in this world and cares less
for another. Nor is the stupidity of the
ordinary run of men without its charm. It
must be a singularly blessed thing not to be
sensitive, not to know what life might be,
and not to find its insufficiency a curse. But
there’s the rub. When the reforms of the
utopists are one and all accomplished, what
shall man do in his Icaria? A million years
hence, perhaps, physical pain will have been
vanquished. Diseases of the body will no
longer exist. Laws will not oppress. Justice
will be inherent. Love will be too far from
Nature to know of shame. The earth will be
a garden of pleasure. Industry will have
enriched every home. Through an equitable
division of treasures acquired without toil,
each one will be on the same footing as his
neighbor. Even envy will have disappeared.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_194">[194]</a></span>
In place of the trials, terrors and superstitions
of to-day, man will enjoy perfect peace.
He will no longer labor. When he journeys
it will be through the air. He will be in
daily communication with Mars, he will have
measured the Infinite and know the bounds
of Space. And in this Eden in which there
will be no forbidden fruit, no ignorance, no
tempter, but where there will be larger flowers,
new perfumes, and a race whose idea of
beauty stands to mine as mine does to that of
prehistoric man, a race whose imagination has
crossed the frontiers of the impossible, who
have developed new senses, who see colors
to which I am blind, who hear music to which
I am deaf, who speak in words of tormented
polish, who have turned art into a plaything
and learning into a birthright, a race that has
no curiosity and who accept their wonderful
existence as the rich to-day accept their
wealth, in this Eden, Boredom will be King.
The Hyperboreans will have their imitators.
The one surcease will be in death. Yet even
that may not be robbed of its grotesqueness.”</p>
<p>A candle flickered a moment and expired
in a splutter of grease. The agony of the
candle aroused him from his revery. “Bah,”
he muttered, “I am becoming a casuist, I
argue with myself.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_195">[195]</a></span></p>
<p>He mixed himself another absinthe, holding
the <i>carafe</i> high in the air, watching the
thin stream of water coalesce with the green
drug and turn with it into an opalescent
milk. He toyed for a moment with the purchases
that he had made in the Rue de la Paix,
and presently, in answer to some query which
they evoked, the soliloquy began anew.</p>
<p>“After what has happened there is nothing
left. I might change my name. I might go
to Brazil or Australia, but with what object?
I could not get away from myself.</p>
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i22">Da me stesso<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Sempre fuggendo, avrò me sempre appresso.<br/></span>
</div></div>
<p class="noi">Beside I don’t care for transplantation. If
I had an ambition it would be a different
matter. If I could be a pretty woman up to
thirty, a cardinal up to fifty, and after that
the Anti-Christ, it might be worth while.
Failing that I might occupy myself with literature.
If I have not written heretofore, it is
because it seems more original not to do so.
But it is not too late. The manufacture of
trash is easy, and it must be a pleasure to the
manufacturer to know that it is trash and
that it sells. It must give him a high
opinion of the intellect of his contemporaries.
Or when, as happens now and then, a work
of enduring value is produced, and it is condemned,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_196">[196]</a></span>
as such works usually are, the author
must take immense delight in the reflection
that the disapproval of imbeciles is the surest
acknowledgement of talent, as it is also its
sweetest mead of praise. For me, of course,
such praise is impossible. Were I to write
successful failures, it must needs be under
a pseudonym. In which case I would have
the consciousness of being scorned as Lenox
Leigh, and admired as John Smith. Beside,
what is there to write about? There
is nothing to prove, there is no certainty,
there is not even a criterion of truth. To-morrow
contradicts yesterday, next week will
contradict this. On no given subject are
there two people who think and see exactly
alike. The book which pleases me bores my
neighbor, and <i>vice versâ</i>. One man holds to
the Episcopal Church, another to the Baptist;
one man is an atheist, another a Jew; one
man thinks a soprano voice a delicious gift,
another says it is a disease of the larynx, and
whatever the divergence of opinion may be,
each one is convinced that he alone is correct.
Supposing, however, that through some
chance I were to descend to posterity in the
garb and aspect of a great man. What is a
great man? The shadow of nothing. The
obscurest <i>privat docent</i> in Germany could<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_197">[197]</a></span>
to-day give points to Newton. And even
though Newton’s glory may still subsist, yet
such are the limitations of fame that the
great majority have never heard of it or
of him. The foremost conqueror of modern
times, he who fell not through his defeats,
but through his victories, is entombed just
across the Seine. And the other day as I
passed the Invalides I heard an intelligent-looking
woman ask her companion who the
Napoleon was that lay buried there. Her
companion did not know.</p>
<p>“But, even were glory more substantial,
what is the applause of posterity to the ears
of the dead? To them honor and ignominy
must be alike unmeaning. No, decidedly,
ambition does not tempt me. And what is
there else that tempts? Love seems to me
now like hunger, an unnecessary affliction,
productive far more of pain than of pleasure;
the most natural, the most alluring thing of
all, see in what plight it has brought me.
Yet it is, I have heard, the ultimate hope of
those who have none. If I relinquish it,
what have I left? The satisfaction of my
curiosity as to what the years may hold?
But I am indifferent. To revenge myself on
Incoul. Certainly, I would like to cut his
heart out and force it down his throat! But<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_198">[198]</a></span>
how would it better me? If I could be
transported to the multicolored nights of
other worlds, and there taste of inexperienced
pleasures, move in new refinements, lose my
own identity, or pursue a chimera and catch
it, it might be worth while, but, as it is—”</p>
<p>The clock on the mantel rang out four
times. Again Lenox started from his revery.
He smiled cynically at himself. “If I continue
in that strain,” he muttered, “it must
be that I am drunk.”</p>
<p>But soon his eyes closed again in mental
retrospect. “And yet,” he mused, “life is
pleasant; ill spent as mine has been, many
times I have found it grateful. In books, I
have often lost the consciousness of my own
identity; now and then music has indeed
had the power to take me to other worlds, to
show me fresh horizons and larger life.
Maida herself came to me like a revelation.
She gave me a new conception of beauty.
Yes, I have known very many pleasant hours.
I was younger then, I fancy. After all, it is
not life that is short, it is youth. When that
goes, as mine seems to have done, outside of
solitude there is little charm in anything.
And what is death but isolation? The most
perfect and impenetrable that Nature has devised.
And whether that isolation come to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_199">[199]</a></span>
me to-night or decades hence, what matters
it? It is odd, though, how the thought of it
unnerves one, and yet, to be logical, I
suppose one should be as uneasy of the
chaos which precedes existence as of the
unknowable that follows it. The proper
course, I take it, is to imitate the infant,
who faces death without a tremor, and enters
it without regret.”</p>
<p>He stood up, and drawing the curtains
aside, looked out into the night. From below
came the rumble of a cart on its way to
the Halles, but otherwise the street was
silent. The houses opposite were livid.
There was a faint flicker from the street
lamps, and above were the trembling stars.
The moon had gone, but there was yet no
sign of coming dawn.</p>
<p>He left the window. The candles had
burned down; he found fresh ones and
lighted them. As he did so, he caught sight
of himself in the glass. His eyes were haggard
and rimmed with circles. It was owing
to the position of the candles, he thought,
and he raised them above his head and
looked again. There was something on his
forehead just above the temple, and he put
the candles down to brush that something
away. He looked again, it was still there.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_200">[200]</a></span>
He peered into the glass and touched it with
his hand. It was nothing, he found, merely
a lock of hair that had turned from black to
white.</p>
<p>He poured out more absinthe, and put the
bottle down empty. Before drinking it he
undid the package which he had bought from
the chemist. First he took from it a box
about three inches long. In it was a toy
syringe, and with it two little instruments.
One of these he adjusted in the projecting
tube, and with his finger felt carefully of the
point. It was sharp as a needle, and beneath
the point was an orifice like a shark’s mouth,
in miniature.</p>
<p>Then he took from the package a phial
that held a brown liquid, in which he detected
a shade like to that of gold. The
odor was dull and heavy. He put the phial
down and stood for a moment irresolute.
He had looked into the past and now he
looked into the future. But in its Arcadias
he saw nothing, save his own image suspended
from a gibbet. He looked again almost
wistfully; no, there was nothing. He
threw off his coat and rolled up his sleeve.
From the phial he filled the syringe, and with
the point pricked the bare arm and sent the
liquid spurting into the flesh. Three times<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_201">[201]</a></span>
he did this. He reached for the absinthe
and left it untasted.</p>
<p>Into his veins had come an unknown, a
delicious languor. He sank into a chair.
The walls of the room dissolved into cataracts
of light and dazzling steel. The flooring
changed to running crimson, and from
that to black, and back to red again. From
the ceiling came flood after flood of fused,
intermingled and oscillating colors. His eyes
closed. The light became more intense, and
burned luminous through the lids. In his
ears filtered a harmony, faint as did it come
from afar, and singular as were it won from
some new consonance of citherns and clavichords,
and suddenly it rose into tumultuous
vibrations, striated with series of ascending
scales. Then as suddenly ceased, drowned
in claps of thunder.</p>
<p>The lights turned purple and glowed less
vividly, as though veils were being lowered
between him and them. But still the languor
continued, sweeter ever and more enveloping,
till from very sweetness it was almost pain.</p>
<p>The room grew darker, the colors waned,
the lights behind the falling veils sank dim,
and dimmer, fading, one by one; a single
spark lingered, it wavered a moment, and
vanished into night.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_202">[202]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XVII">CHAPTER XVII.</a><br/>
<small>MAIDA’S NUPTIALS.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">For some time after Lenox had gone
there was much excitement at the Capucines.
But gradually the excitement wore
itself out, as excitement always does. Baccarat
for that night, at least, had lost its allurement.
The habitués dispersed, some to
other clubs, some to their homes, and soon
the great rooms were deserted by all, save
one deaf man, who, undisturbed by the commotion,
had given himself up to the task of
memorizing Sarcey’s feuilleton.</p>
<p>Among the earliest to leave was Mr. Incoul.
“Come,” he said to Blydenburg, “you
have seen enough for one evening,” and Blydenburg
got into his coat and followed his
companion to the street. They walked some
distance before either of them spoke, but
when they reached the hotel at which Blydenburg
was stopping, that gentleman halted
at an adjacent lamp-post.</p>
<p>“I must say, Incoul,” he began, “and I<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_203">[203]</a></span>
hope you will take it very kindly—I must
say that I think you might have left that
matter for some one else to discover. Why,
hang it all! Leigh is a friend of your wife’s;
you know all his people; to you the money
was nothing. Really, Incoul, damn me if I
don’t think it hard-hearted. I don’t care
that for what those frog-eaters say; the cards
you said were marked, don’t weigh with me
in the least; no, not an atom; it is my opinion
that the young man was just as innocent as
a child unborn. No, sir, you can’t make me
believe that he—that he—I hate to say the
word—that he cheated. Why, man alive! I
had my eyes on him the whole time. A better-looking
fellow never breathed, and he just
chucked out the cards one after another
without so much as looking at them; it
seemed to me that he didn’t care a rap
whether he won or lost. I put down a louis
or two myself, and he never noticed it; he
left the whole thing to the croupier, and now
that I come to think of it—”</p>
<p>“Yes, I know,” Mr. Incoul interrupted.
“I am sorry myself.”</p>
<p>“Well then I’ll be shot if you look so.
Good night to you,” and with that Blydenburg
stamped up to the hotel, rang the bell,
and slammed the door behind him.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_204">[204]</a></span></p>
<p>Mr. Incoul walked on. The annoyance of
his friend affected him like a tonic; he continued
his way refreshed. Presently he
reached a cab stand. The clock marked
11.50. He had other duties, and he let himself
into an Urbaine and told the man to
drive to the Parc Monceau. On arriving he
tossed a coin to the cabby and entered the
house.</p>
<p>In the vestibule a footman started from a
nap. Mr. Incoul went up to the floor above
and waited, the door ajar. For a little space
he heard the man moving about, whispering
to a fellow footman. But soon the whispering
ceased. Evidently the men had gone.
Assured of this, he opened a drawer and
took from it a steel instrument, one that in
certain respects resembled a key; the haft,
however, was unusually large, the end was
not blunt but hollow, yet fashioned like a
pincer, and the projecting tongue which,
in the case of an ordinary key serves to lock
and unlock, was absent. This he put in his
pocket. He went out in the hall and
listened again. The house was very quiet.
He made sure that the footmen had really
gone, and walking on tip-toe to his wife’s
door, rapped ever so noiselessly.</p>
<p>“Is it you, Harmon?” he heard her ask.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_205">[205]</a></span>
Had he wished he had no time to answer. A
key turned in the lock, the door was opened,
and before him Maida stood, smiling a silent
welcome to his first visit to her room.</p>
<p>As he entered and closed the door her lips
parted; she would have spoken, but something
in his face repelled her; the smile fell from
her face and the words remained unuttered.</p>
<p>He stood a moment rubbing his hands
frigidly, as were he cold, yet the room was
not chilly. There was no fire in the grate,
but two gas fixtures gave out sufficient heat
to warm it unassisted. Then presently he
looked at her. She had thrown herself on a
lounge near the hearth, and was certainly
most fair to see. Her white gown had been
replaced by one of looser cut; her neck and
arms were no longer bare, but one foot shod
in fur that the folds of the skirt left visible
was stockingless and the wonder of her hair
was unconfined.</p>
<p>He found a chair and seated himself before
her. “Madam,” he said at last, “I am here
at your request.”</p>
<p>The girl started as were she stung.</p>
<p>“You were obliging enough this evening
to inform me that we had come into our own.
What is it?” His eyebrows were raised and
about his thin lips was just the faintest expression<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_206">[206]</a></span>
of contempt. “What is it into which
we have come?”</p>
<p>Maida grew whiter than the whitest ermine;
she moved her hand as would she answer,
but he motioned her to be silent.</p>
<p>“I will tell you,” he continued in his
measured way, “and you will pardon me if
the telling is long. Before it was my privilege
to make your acquaintance I was not, as
you know, a bachelor; my wife”—and he accentuated
the possessive pronoun as had he
had but one—“was to me very dear. When I
lost her, I thought at first there was nothing
left me, but with time I grew to believe that
life might still be livable. It is easy for you to
understand that in my misfortune I was not
dogmatic. I knew that no one is perfect, and
I felt that if my wife had seemed perfection
to me it was because we understood and loved
one another. Then, too, as years passed I
found my solitude very tedious. I was, it is
true, no longer young, but I was not what the
world has agreed to call old; and I thought
that among the gracious women whom I
knew it might be possible for me to find one
who would consent to dispel the solitude,
and who might perhaps be able to bring me
some semblance of my former happiness. It
was under these conditions that I met you.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_207">[207]</a></span>
You remember what followed. I saw that
you were beautiful, more so, indeed, than my
wife, and I imagined that you were honest
and self-respecting—in fact, a girl destined
to become a noble woman. It was then that
I ventured to address you. You told me
of your poverty; I begged you to share
the money which was mine; you told me
that you did not love me. I answered
that I would wait. I was glad to share the
money with you. I was willing to wait. I
knew that you would adorn riches; I believed
that I could win your love, and I felt that
the winning would be pleasant. I even admired
you for the agreement which you suggested.
I thought it could not come from
any one not wholly refined and mistress of
herself. In short, believing in your frankness,
I offered you what I had to give. In
return what did I ask? The opportunity to
be with you, the opportunity of winning your
affection and therewith a little trust, a little
confidence and the proper keeping of my
name. Surely I was not extravagant in my
demands. And you, for all your frankness,
omitted to tell me the one thing essential:
you omitted to tell me—”</p>
<p>“Do not say it,” the girl wailed; “do not
say it.” The tears were falling, her form was<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_208">[208]</a></span>
rocked with sobs. She was piteous before
him who knew not what pity was.</p>
<p>He had risen and she crouched as though
she feared he had risen to strike her.</p>
<p>“Of your lover whom I caught to-night
cheating at cards.”</p>
<p>He had struck her indeed. She looked up
through her tears astonished at the novelty
of the blow, and yet still she did not seem to
understand. She stared at him vacantly as
though uncertain of the import of his words.</p>
<p>“Of your lover,” he repeated; “the blackleg.”</p>
<p>She rose from her seat. She was trembling
from head to foot. To support herself
she stretched a hand to the mantel and
clutching it, she steadied herself. Then,
still looking him in the face, she said huskily,
“You tell me Lenox Leigh cheated at
cards? It is not true!”</p>
<p>“He <i>is</i> your lover, then!” hissed Incoul,
and into his green, dilated eyes there came a
look of such hideous hate that the girl shrank
back.</p>
<p>In her fear she held out her arms as though
to shield herself from him, and screamed
aloud. “You are going to kill me!” she cried.</p>
<p>“Be quiet,” he answered, “you will wake
the house.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_209">[209]</a></span></p>
<p>But the order was needless. The girl fell
backwards on the lounge. He stood and
looked at her without moving. Presently she
moaned; her eyes opened and her sobs broke
out afresh. And still he gazed as though in
the enjoyment of a hope fulfilled.</p>
<p>“Now get to your bed,” he said, at last.</p>
<p>His eyes searched the room. On a table
was a pink box labeled bromide of potassium,
and filled with powders wrapped in tin
foil. He opened and smelled of one and then
opened another and poured the contents of
both into a glass which he half filled with
water.</p>
<p>“Drink it,” he said.</p>
<p>She obeyed dumbly. The tears fell into
the glass as she drank. But in a little while
her sobs came only intermittently. “I will
sleep now,” she murmured, helplessly. “I
think I will sleep now.” Yet still he waited.
Her head had fallen far back on the sofa, her
hair drooped about her shoulders, her lips
were gray.</p>
<p>He took her in his arms and carried her to
the bed. One of her furred slippers dropped
on the way, the other he took from her. The
foot it held hardly filled his palm. He
loosened her gown. He would have taken it
off but he feared to awake her. Was she<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_210">[210]</a></span>
really asleep, he wondered. He peered
down at her eyelids but they did not move.
Surely she slept. A door that led to a dressing-room
was open. He closed it. The
chair in which he had sat he restored to its
original position. Then he turned out the
gas. On each of the fixtures his fingers
rested the fraction of a minute longer than
was necessary. He groped to the door,
opened it noiselessly and listened. There
was no sound. The house was still as a
tomb. He closed the door behind him and
drawing the nameless instrument from his
pocket he inserted it carefully in the keyhole,
gave it a quick turn and went to his room.</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_211">[211]</a></span></p>
<div class="chapter"/>
<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XVIII">CHAPTER XVIII.</a><br/>
<small>MR. INCOUL GOES OVER THE ACCOUNTS.</small></h2>
<p class="cap">There is a saying to the effect that any
one who walks long enough in front of
the Grand Hôtel will, in the course of time,
encounter all his acquaintances, past, present
and to be. On the second day after the dinner
in the Parc Monceau, Mr. Blydenburg
crossed the boulevard. It was an unpleasant
afternoon of the kind which is frequent in the
early winter: the air was damp and penetrating,
and the sky presented that unrelieved
and cheerless pallor of which Paris is
believed to be the unique possessor. Mr.
Blydenburg’s spirits were affected; he was ill
at ease and inclined to attribute his depression
to the rawness of the air and the blanched
sky above him. He was to leave Paris on
the morrow, and he felt that he would be glad
to shake its mud from his feet. He was then
on the way to his banker’s to close an account,
and as he trudged along, with an umbrella
under his arm and his trousers turned up, in<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_212">[212]</a></span>
spite of the prospect of departure he was
not in a contented or satisfied frame of mind.</p>
<p>For many hours previous he had cross-questioned
himself in regard to Incoul. He
knew that in speaking out his mind he had
done right, yet he could not help perceiving
that right-doing and outspokenness are not
always synonymous with the best breeding.
Truth certainly is attractive, particularly
to him who tells it, but one has to be
hospitably inclined to receive it at all times
as a welcome guest. Beside, he told himself,
Incoul was a man to whom remonstrance
was irksome, he chafed at it no matter what
its supporting truths might be. Perhaps
then it would have been better had he held
his tongue. Incoul was his oldest friend, he
could not afford to lose him; at his time of
life the making of new ones was difficult.
And yet did he seek him in a conciliatory
mood it would be tantamount to acknowledging
that Incoul had been in the right, and the
more he thought the matter over the more
convinced he became that Incoul was in the
wrong. Leigh, he could have sworn, was
innocent. The charge that had been brought
against him was enough to make a mad dog
blush. It was preposterous on the face of it.
Then, too, the young man had been given no<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_213">[213]</a></span>
opportunity to defend himself. The honest-hearted
gentleman did not make it plain to
his own mind how Leigh could have defended
himself even had the opportunity been
offered, but he waived objections; his faith
was firm. He was enough of a logician to
understand that circumstantial evidence,
however strong, is not unrebuttable proof,
and he assured himself, unless the young
man confessed his guilt, that he at least
would never believe it.</p>
<p>He was not, therefore, in a contented or
satisfied frame of mind; he was irresolute
how to act to Incoul; he did not wish to lose
an old friend and he was physically unable
to be unjust to a new one. After crossing
the boulevard he passed the Grand Hôtel
and just as he left the wide portals behind
him he saw Mr. Wainwaring with whom two
days before he had dined in the Parc Monceau.
He bowed and would have continued
his way, but Mr. Wainwaring stopped him.</p>
<p>“You have heard, have you not?” he asked
excitedly, “you have heard about Mrs. Incoul?”</p>
<p>“Heard what?”</p>
<p>“It appears that on going to bed on Sunday
night she turned the gas on instead of
turning it off. They smelled the gas in the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_214">[214]</a></span>
hall and tried to get into the room, but the
door was locked; finally they broke it down.
They found her unconscious though still
breathing; they worked over her for five
hours, but it was no use.”</p>
<p>Blydenburg grounded his umbrella on the
pavement for support. “Good God!” he
muttered. “Good God!”</p>
<p>“Yes,” Mr. Wainwaring continued, “it
is terrible! A sweeter girl never lived. My
daughter knew her intimately; she went there
this morning to see her and learned of it at
the door. I have just been up there myself.
I thought Incoul might see me, but he
couldn’t. Utterly prostrated I suppose. I
can understand that. We all know how devoted
he was. He will never get over it—never.”</p>
<p>Blydenburg still held to his umbrella for
support.</p>
<p>“I must go there,” he said.</p>
<p>“Yes, go by all means; he will see you, of
course. Poor Incoul! I am heartily sorry for
him. After all, wealth is not happiness, is it?”</p>
<p>At this platitude Blydenburg would have
gone, but Mr. Wainwaring had more news to
impart. “You know about young Leigh,
Mrs. Manhattan’s brother, don’t you?” he
continued.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_215">[215]</a></span></p>
<p>Blydenburg looked down at his umbrella
in a weary way.</p>
<p>“Yes, I was there,” he answered, “but I
don’t believe it.”</p>
<p>“Oh, you mean that affair at the club.
Well, it appears that it is true. From what I
make out of the papers, he went to his hotel
afterwards, and took a dose of morphine.
It was his only way out of it. I couldn’t
bear him, could you?”</p>
<p>Blydenburg nodded vacantly. “He must
have been guilty.”</p>
<p>“As to that there is no doubt. De la
Dèche says it is a wonder he was not caught
before. Well, good day; tell Incoul how
profoundly grieved we all are. Good day.”</p>
<p>Presently Blydenburg found himself in a
cab. He was a trifle dazed at what he had
heard. He was not brilliant; he was very
tiresome at times, the sort of a man that likes
big words and small dictionaries, yet somehow
he was lovable and more human than
many far cleverer than he. To his own misfortune
he had a heart, and in disasters like
these it bled. He would have crossed the
Continent to bring a moment’s pleasure to the
girl that had been asphyxiated in her bed,
and he would have given his daughter to the
man who had been choked down to the grave.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_216">[216]</a></span>
Then, too, as nearly as he could see, he had
wronged Incoul and Incoul was in great
grief. As the Urbaine rolled on, his thoughts
did not grow nimbler. In his head was a
full, aching sensation; he felt benumbed, and
raised the collar of his coat. Soon the cab
stopped before the house in the Parc Monceau.
He had no little set speech prepared;
he wanted merely to take his friend by the
hand and let him feel his sympathy unspoken,
but when the footman came in answer to his
ring, he was told that Mr. Incoul could see
no one. He went back to his cab. It had
begun to rain, but he did not notice it, and
left the window open.</p>
<p>As the cab rolled down the street again,
Mr. Incoul, who had been occupied with the
morning paper, sent for the courier.</p>
<p>“Karl,” he said, when the man appeared,
“I will go over your accounts.”</p>